1 Introduction A “safety case” is a structured argument that an AI system is unlikely to cause a catastrophe. Clymer et al. detail four potential arguments that could be used to develop a safety case [ 1 ] . An inability safety case argues the system lacks the capabilities to cause a catastrophe in any plausible deployment scenario. For example, a model with no knowledge of bioweapons cannot build one. A control safety case argues the system cannot cause a catastrophe because it would be prevented from doing so. For instance, a system only deployed under strict supervision can be hindered from deploying any bioweapons, even if it knows how to build them. A trustworthiness safety case claims the system could cause a catastrophe but we have evidence it will reliably not choose to do so. For instance, we have verified it would not build a bioweapon even if capable. Finally, a deference safety case relies on trusting an AI system that says the target system would not cause a catastrophe. For example, our automated safety researcher tells us the system would not build a bioweapon, though we cannot independently verify this. Of course, in this case we would also need arguments for the competence and trustworthiness of the automated safety researcher. This ordering goes from safety cases that are easier to make to those that are more difficult. If we have a system which is not able to cause a catastrophe, it is easier to prove this inability than to prove, for example, its trustworthiness. Only if we have a system that is so powerful that we cannot make an inability safety case, because it actually might have the ability to cause a catastrophe, we have to move on to construct another safety case. So far, LLM providers have mostly relied on the inability of their models to ensure their safety. The field has developed numerous dangerous capability evaluations that check for the ability to cause a catastrophe [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ] . However, with the speed of progress we have recently seen in LLM capabilities, we may soon no longer be able to rely on inability safety cases. A recent example of inability safety cases becoming less viable can be seen in Anthropic’s decision to increase Claude Opus 4’s AI Safety Level to ASL-3 due to increased capabilities in domains related to biological, radiological, chemical, and nuclear weapons [ 6 ] . Similarly, OpenAI has chosen to implement output monitors for GPT-5 that screen generations for potentially harmful biological and chemical information, withholding or interrupting generation when such content is detected [ 7 ] . Much of the progress in LLM capabilities in the last year is due to reasoning models. These models are trained to first output a “chain-of-thought” (CoT) before giving an answer, then are trained via reinforcement learning based on the final answer [ 8 ] . This process, sometimes referred to as Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), reinforces reasoning traces that lead to correct or preferred outcomes [ 9 ] . The models that emerge from this training process, so-called reasoning models, outperform models trained without CoT reasoning, especially in mathematics, coding, and logic benchmarks [ 10 , 11 ] . While the existence of the chain-of-thought is essentially an artifact of how they are trained from a capabilities perspective, it proves remarkably useful for safety. Recent AI safety research has leveraged CoT in several ways. Researchers have identified problematic and misaligned behaviors in LLMs through CoT analysis [ 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 ] and demonstrated that CoT monitoring can improve control protocols [ 16 ] . A group of researchers from leading AI labs and academia have pointed out the opportunity that CoT monitoring provides for AI safety and called for more research in CoT monitorability, and an effort from model providers to keep CoTs monitorable [ 17 ] . Building on these insights, this paper examines how CoT monitoring can be used to construct a safety case. We begin by exploring approaches for building CoT monitoring safety cases in Section 2 , then present a roadmap in Section 3 that outlines the technical requirements that must be met before such safety cases become viable. Throughout this roadmap, we link to research project proposals (Appendix D ) and prediction markets (Appendix A ) that track whether relevant technical developments will occur.