2 How a CoT Monitoring Safety Case Might Work Extrapolating from the research above, we can imagine two ways to construct a safety case using CoT monitoring. First, we could implement control protocols that use CoT monitoring to catch the AI system when it expresses thoughts pointing toward a misaligned goal. This would constitute a control safety case. Second, we could conduct extensive red teaming before deployment, using CoT monitoring to look for misaligned tendencies. If none are found, one could construct a trustworthiness safety case. In practice, this monitoring could be performed by humans when the cases we need to monitor are rare, or by trusted AI systems when monitoring needs to be done at scale. Both approaches treat the absence of certain thoughts in the CoT as strong evidence that the AI system does not harbor these thoughts. However, research has shown significant limitations to this assumption. Answers can be determined by considerations not mentioned in the CoT [ 18 , 6 ] . The CoT can contain post hoc reasoning that has nothing to do with the underlying computational process [ 19 ] . Barez et al. synthesized this and other evidence to conclude that the CoT cannot be taken as ground truth regarding what is happening in a model [ 20 ] . So how can we construct a safety case if we cannot take the CoT as ground truth about what the model is thinking? One promising approach is suggested by recent findings from Emmons et al. [ 21 ] . They reveal a crucial distinction between “CoT-as-computation” (where CoT is necessary for arriving at the final result) and “CoT-as-rationalization” (where CoT is not necessary and may be post hoc). While LLMs cannot be trusted to provide accurate reasoning in the CoT-as-rationalization regime, current models report their reasoning steps faithfully when operating in the CoT-as-computation regime. We later discuss that this might not remain true for future models, which could develop methods to obscure sophisticated reasoning through internalized reasoning (Section 3.2 ), encoded reasoning (Section 3.6 ), or neuralese (Section 3.5 ). Building on this finding, we can construct a two-part safety case. First, we create a separate inability safety case for the model operating without its CoT: we argue that the model cannot successfully cause a catastrophe without using its CoT to track incremental steps. Tasks like building a bioweapon or successfully escaping from a server likely cannot be accomplished “in a single forward pass” without the scaffolding that CoT provides. We can then use CoT monitoring to catch the model if it performs reasoning that would enable it to cause catastrophic harm. Emmons et al. introduce two key concepts: “Monitorability” (the possibility for CoTs to be understood by humans) and “Automatability” (the possibility for CoTs to be understood by other LLMs) [ 21 ] . Depending on the relative capabilities of trusted LLMs compared to humans, CoTs might be understandable by humans but not by trusted AIs. However, we might also develop trusted AIs that are superhuman at CoT monitoring, meaning that reasoning traces might be monitorable only by AIs and not by humans. In such a case, we might have to rely on what turns out to be a deference safety case. Note that throughout the remainder of this paper, we use “monitorable” to mean that CoTs can be effectively monitored in a control safety case (as in Figure 1 ), which may require automatability when human monitoring is infeasible due to scale constraints. The choice between human and AI monitoring also depends on the type of safety case we’re constructing. Monitoring by humans, or at least with more humans in the loop, would be more feasible if we use CoT monitoring in the red teaming phase building up to a trustworthiness safety case. When we want to build a control safety case with CoT monitoring during wide deployment, the CoTs need to be monitorable with humans mostly out of the loop due to time and scale constraints. Figure 1: Sketch of integrating CoT monitoring in a control safety case. The example focuses on a specific dangerous potential behaviour: self-exfiltration. To make this more concrete, Figure 1 sketches how a control safety case might incorporate CoT monitoring, following the notation developed by Korbak et al. [ 22 ] . The safety case combines an inability claim about the model without access to its CoT (evaluated as described in Section 3.2 ) with monitoring that flags attempts to reason about exfiltration in the CoT (evaluated as outlined in Section 3.4 ). It is important to recognize that demonstrating an AI system cannot perform one specific dangerous action does not constitute a complete safety case. This would need to be integrated into a broader argument covering all relevant catastrophic risks. If a model could cause a catastrophe through some route that does not involve any monitorable reasoning, then that route must be addressed by a separate safety case that does not rely on CoT monitoring. Furthermore, while this sketch includes a node for the monitor’s ability and propensity to flag non-encoded reasoning about exfiltration, establishing this capability in detail lies outside the scope of this report and reduces to standard control safety case methodology discussed by Korbak et al. [ 22 ] . In the remainder of this paper, we will examine what technological and methodological developments determine the feasibility of such a safety case.