6 Discussion and Takeaways

Given that all faithfulness tests are designed very differently and only focus on the self-consistency of outputs (§
3 ), it is unsurprising that they deliver diverse results across
models and datasets. But the tests show some trends:
LLaMA2- and Mistral-chat are more self-consistent than the base models. This adds to the interesting effects of RLHF and instruction tuning (beyond just model performance).

Prior work on faithfulness tests already showed that LLMs have inconsistent behaviour, but none could analyse the divergences in a deeper way. Our CC-SHAP metric
makes the effect of inputs on model outputs and explanations transparent. We uncovered that strong models, unlike GPT, show significant changes in contributions when generating NLEs, but not the answer –
while other tests (except ‘constructing input from explanation’) ignore the NLE, and only check
whether edits are mentioned verbatim or not.
Our insights, based on CC-SHAP, show that
explanations
 must be considered
more
 and
more deeply
 – relative to the answer.

Although CC-SHAP, like prior methods, measures self-consistency – and not faithfulness –, it has, unlike prior tests, the advantages that it does not require input edits, and that it outputs a
continuous value per instance
 – which helps to stabilise results.
It combines the

input- and output-level
 to measure how much individual input tokens contribute to model outputs, which is much
nearer to the internal workings of a model
 than
recording the softmax output. Thus, we argue that our method takes us one step further towards measuring faithfulness –
which is important
for LLMs providing plausibly sounding explanations.
By adding CC-SHAP to our new
Comparative Consistency Bank
, we showed that
CC-SHAP correlates the most with counterfactual editing
 (§
A.8
), and offer deeper insight into the effects of other tests, on input
and
 output contributions for
NLEs vs. answers
 (§
B.3
).

The research interest for the topic of LLM explanation faithfulness is constantly growing: between the submission for review and publication of this paper, more studies about faithfulness have emerged
(Paul et al.,
2024 ; Madsen et al.,
2024 ; Braun and Kunz,
2024 ; Chuang et al.,
2024 ; Agarwal et al.,
2024 ; Kunz and Kuhlmann,
2024 ; Siegel et al.,
2024 ; Matton et al.,
2024 )
 – but still remain at the level of self-consistency. Among them,
Siegel et al. (2024)
 – like CC-SHAP – make use of model probabilities. While CC-SHAP uses model probabilities to infer input token contributions,
Siegel et al. (2024)
 modify the Counterfactual Edits test to compare the output probability distribution before and after the edit – unlike the original Counterfactual Edits tests, which measures the model self-consistency by comparing output tokens before and after the edit. Because a proper comparison of output tokens requires semantic evaluation, the probability-wise comparison of
Siegel et al. (2024)
 circumvents the evaluation problem.

Matton et al. (2024)
 combine interpretability methods and edit-based tests. They compare what a model
claims
 to be important, by reacting to input exits, as opposed to what
really is
 important,
as interpreted by their interpretability method.
However, the question of how to address the matter of faithfulness remains a very difficult and open research question, so that
future work
may focus more on mechanistic interpretability methods to analyse
the inner workings of LLMs.