1 Introduction

Large language models (LLMs)
generate answers in various tasks of increasing difficulty, acting as chatbots
OpenAI (2023); Touvron et al. (2023)
, as programming
Chen et al. (2021)
 or scientific writing assistants
Taylor et al. (2022)
. But often enough they behave unintuitively, showing undesirable behaviour:
They can endorse a user’s misconceptions
Perez et al. (2023)
, or generate Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
Wei et al. (2022)
 explanations that hide their sensitivity to biasing inputs
Turpin et al. (2023)
; they can be insensitive to label correctness in in-context learning
Min et al. (2022)
, and can produce correct predictions with irrelevant or misleading prompts
Webson and Pavlick (2022)
.

Especially in cases of unintuitive behaviour, explanations for their way of acting would be helpful. Even though LLMs can provide plausibly sounding explanations for their answers, recent work argues that model generated natural language explanations (NLEs) are often unfaithful
Atanasova et al. (2023); Lanham et al. (2023)
.
Obtaining
faithful
 explanations that
accurately reflect the reasoning process of a model

Jacovi and Goldberg (2020)
 is important for understanding the reasons behind an LLM’s answer, and is instrumental for a
trustworthy AI. Being able to measure NLE faithfulness is most critical when models provide answers we are unable to judge – whether it is AI uncovering new scientific facts or ChatGPT helping with homework.

Recent works aim to test the faithfulness of NLEs that LLMs produce about their
own
 predictions (cf. §
2.2 ).
But the studies are hard to compare, as they use both different models and data
(Tab.
3 ).
They test for faithfulness by editing model inputs and measuring whether the prediction changes or stays consistent to the original answer.
We argue that faithfulness of a NLE is more elusive than what existing tests (including ours) can measure, and that what current tests are measuring is
self-consistency
.
We demonstrate this by comparing all tests (including ours) on the
same models and data
, showing that predictions differ widely.
While existing tests compare output changes resulting from input edits on the surface, we propose a measure that
does not need input edits
 and that more closely analyses how model outputs relate to
how
 it processes the input.

Overall, our paper contributes the following:

•

We argue (§
3 ) that current tests that aim to measure NLE faithfulness,
in reality measure the
self-consistency of model outputs
 – without giving insight into a model’s inner reasoning processes.

•

We introduce (§
4 ) CC-SHAP, a new
fine-grained and explainable
self-consistency measure

gauging how well a model’s input contributions align, when it produces a prediction and explanation, and use it
for post-hoc and CoT explanations.

•

Since we
cannot
 obtain ground truth for faithfulness by human judgement, we can only compare the predictions of existing tests (§
5 ).
Hence, we are first to
compare
 existing tests – including CC-SHAP – on a unified set of models and data after constructing the
Comparative Consistency Bank (CCB).

In summary, our
takeaways
 §
6 are the following:

•

We argue in §
3 that existing tests measure self-consistency and not faithfulness. And since they adopt different test scenarios,
we expect them to make different predictions. Indeed,
they deliver
different results

for the same models and data (§
5 ),
highlighting the heterogeneity of prior tests that target faithfulness. Given this result, and arguing that current tests do not touch the inner workings of LLMs,
we stress that the quest for true
faithfulness metrics
 remains open.

•

By analysing CCB, we find trends: i) Chat LLMs show higher self-consistency
than their base variants; ii) CC-SHAP agrees most with Counterfactual Edits; iii) We could not detect, nor exclude a relation between model size and self-consistency.

•

With CC-SHAP we take a small step further towards measuring faithfulness: Prior tests compare outputs
before and after
input edits but don’t give
insight into how changes in the output relate to changes in
how the LLM processes the input.
CC-SHAP, by contrast, compares input importances for answer and for explanation generation – without editing inputs.
Comparing predictions from CC-SHAP to prior tests
shows that it offers transparency about how inputs (and also possible input modifications)
influence LLM workings.