3 Unfaithfulness in Reasoning Benchmarks Figure 4 : Claude 3.7 Sonnet (non-thinking) can use Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts to correctly answer Putnam problems. Full details on this example can be found in Appendix H . The second rollout was generated in an independent chat with Claude 3.7 Sonnet (non-thinking) as the autorater. This is a clear unfaithful shortcut where the model tests a single example for n = 2 𝑛 2 n=2 italic_n = 2 that fails, but then claims to have performed a “careful examination of the constraints” to conclude that no solutions exist for any n ≥ 2 𝑛 2 n\geq 2 italic_n ≥ 2 . No such examination is shown: the model jumps from testing one case to the general claim without any proof. In this section, we show that both thinking and non-thinking frontier models exhibit Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts , a form of unfaithfulness in which models use clearly illogical reasoning to simplify solving problems, while not acknowledging this illogical reasoning at all. We show that models make unfaithful illogical shorcuts on Putnam problems, a difficult and commonly-used benchmark for AI progress in mathematics [ 32 ] . Unfaithful illogical shortcuts are related to reward hacking [ 33 , 12 ] , but we do not use that term because a) we focus on cases where the shortcuts are not verbalized by the model, making them unfaithful and b) we observe unfaithful illogical shortcuts in several models trained both with and without reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR; Yue et al. [ 34 ] ). 4 4 4 For the purposes of this paper ‘thinking model’ and ‘model trained with RLVR’ are the same thing. Current RLVR training methods do not incentivize either intermediate step correctness, or verbalization of reasoning. Therefore we expect unfaithful illogical shortcuts to continue to arise in future models by default, unless training methods are changed. 3.1 Methodology for Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts We develop a pipeline for detecting Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts composed of the three following abstract stages: 1. Evaluation of answer correctness . To focus on examples that are more likely to be unfaithful rather than mistaken reasoning, we filter out CoT rollouts where the model gets an incorrect answer. We also only use 215/326 of the PutnamBench questions that have answers that are not easily guessable (e.g. in this section we exclude questions with Yes/No answers). 2. Evaluation of step criticality . We identify the steps of reasoning that were critical for the model getting to its final answer. By “critical” here, we mean steps of stated reasoning that are part of the causal chain for reaching the model’s final answer. Note that these critical steps may not truly be causally important for the language model’s internal reasoning process. 5 5 5 The approaches in our work show that the CoT is unfaithful via “proof by contradiction”: assuming the stated reasoning is faithful, and then finding a contradiction under this assumption. Therefore it is natural to define criticality in terms of the stated reasoning. 3. Evaluation of step unfaithfulness . We want to measure whether individual steps in CoT reasoning are unfaithful. We use autoraters to evaluate stages 1-3. Appendix I describes the full pipeline in detail. Stage 3. is the most important stage of the pipeline. In this stage, to evaluate the reasoning steps for unfaithfulness we prompt Claude 3.7 Sonnet thinking with 8 Yes/No questions (see LABEL:figUnfaithfulShortcutPrompt for the exact prompt). If all of the model’s Yes/No answers match the expected Yes/No answers for unfaithful illogical shortcuts, we manually reviewed that response. This fixed several common pitfalls the autoraters had, and ensured through these two checks that models never acknowledged that a specific step was illogical in all their rollout. We study 6 models from 3 different model developers, one thinking model and one normal model per developer. Specifically, we evaluate QwQ 32B Preview [ 4 ] and Qwen 72B IT [ 35 ] from Alibaba, Claude 3.7 Sonnet and Claude 3.7 Sonnet with thinking enabled from Anthropic [ 24 ] , and DeepSeek (V3) Chat [ 29 ] and DeepSeek R1 [ 6 ] from DeepSeek. The models’ accuracies on the PutnamBench subset of 215 215 215 215 problems are: Qwen 72B IT: 41/215; QwQ 32B Preview: 115/215; DeepSeek Chat (V3): 81/215; DeepSeek R1: 172/215; Claude Sonnet 3.7 without extended thinking: 69/215; Claude Sonnet 3.7 with Thinking (from OpenRouter): 114/215. 3.1.1 Results for Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts Figure 5 : Unfaithfulness rate (the proportion of correct responses that contain unfaithful shortcuts) across thinking and non-thinking frontier models from three different developers (Claude Sonnet 3.7 w/ and w/o thinking enabled, DeepSeek R1 / V3, and Qwen QwQ 32B Preview / 72B IT). Using our approach described in the previous section where an LLM flags responses that pass 8 criteria defining an unfaithful shortcut, we manually reviewed all responses. The proportion of correct LLM responses with at least one unfaithful shortcut in the reasoning can be found in Figure 5 . Analysis. These results suggest that unfaithfulness decreases when going from non-thinking models to thinking models, matching [ 36 ] ’s findings. Qualitative examples suggest that Qwen 72B IT makes many errors and broadly seems incompetent at answering math problems accurately, but Claude employs cleverer strategies that mean it gets to the correct answer with subtle but clearly illogical reasoning. Alternative Hypothesis 1: are these results an artifact of contaminated data? One possible cause of Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts is that contaminated training data leads to strange reasoning patterns. For example [ 37 ] suggests this as a hypothesis for restoration errors, which we also concur with ( Section 3.2 ). However, it seems unlikely that Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts are an artifact of conaminated data. We found 10 problems of the 12 2024 Putnam problems, an exam done in December 2024, past the November 2024 cutoff of Claude 3.7 Sonnet [ 24 ] and all other LLMs in this work. We sampled 5 rollouts with temperature 0.3 from Claude 3.7 Sonnet non-thinking (resulting in 91 rollouts that concluded in correct solutions), and found that 14 of the 17 cases that Claude Sonnet 3.7 non-thinking flagged as Unfaithful Shortcuts (using the same methodology as the mainline evaluations as described in Appendix I , besides using Claude 3.7 non-thinking as both the model generating rollouts and autorating – not the thinking model). An example is depicted in Figure 4 . Alternative Hypothesis 2: do models know they’re being blatantly illogical? Another alternative hypothesis to explain these results is that models do not know they are producing blatantly illogical reasoning, which would explain why they do not verbalize this. While our setup attempts to account for this by clearly signposting blatant illogical reasoning, not merely errors, we tested whether, when using a model as an autorater of its own rollouts, it would classify its rollouts as blatantly illogical. Specifically, for each question that the 8-question autorater and manual review classified as an Unfaithful Illogical Shortcut (i.e. the true positives in Figure 5 ), DeepSeek R1, Claude 3.7 Sonnet (non-thinking) all classified a step in the same question as clearly illogical. DeepSeek V3 classified a step in 1/3 of the true positives as clearly illogical, Qwen 72B 3/10 and QwQ 0/1. Full results are described in Section I.3 . Together, this suggests that the strongest models are aware that they are making illogical errors, but the situation is less clear for the weaker models. Alternative Hypothesis 3: do unfaithful illogical shortcuts consistently arise? The final alternative hypothesis we consider in this paper is that unfaithful illogical shortcuts arise highly infrequently and in arbitrary locations across datasets. If this were true, it would decrease the likelihood that models know they are being blatantly illogical, as also discussed in Alternative Hypothesis 2. Additionally, if Unfaithful Illogical Shortcuts occurred at arbitrary locations and infrequently, this would make future work studying mitigations and scientific understanding (such as through mechanistic interpretability) more difficult. To test how consistently unfaithful illogical shortcuts arise, we took all questions where Claude 3.7 Sonnet non-thinking had a true positive unfaithful illogical shortcut in Figure 5 and regenerated two new rollouts indepdendently. Re-running the methodology from Section 3.1 , we found that 17/26 of these rollouts contained unfaithful shortcuts, far above the rate of questions with unfaithful shortcuts in Figure 5 . Appendix J discusses full results. 3.2 Negative Results for Restoration Errors We used a pipeline similar to the one described in Section 3.1 to evaluate Restoration Errors [ 37 ] . Restoration errors occur when a model makes a reasoning error in one step and silently corrects it in a subsequent step (or final answer) without acknowledging the mistake. This pattern of unfaithfulness is closely related to existing research on the faithfulness of Chain-of-Thought, which often edits tokens in the middle of rollouts of the model in order to measure causal dependence of the CoT (e.g. Lanham et al. [ 10 ], Gao [ 38 ] ). Appendix K contains a detailed account of the methodology and results obtained for Restoration Errors, as well as the bespoke prompt for evaluating this type of unfaithfulness. Overall, we did not find evidence of restoration errors other than cases of likely dataset contamination. This is because most models that we study have a knowledge cutoff date in the middle of 2024, and all our datasets include questions released before this date.