4 Data Collection Process

In this section, we describe the full process for constructing
Reveal
, using our annotation schema. The process is divided into two phases: Collecting and generating data for annotation (steps 1–2) and the annotation process (step 3).

Step 1: Reasoning Chain Generation.

We use four open-domain complex-reasoning QA datasets to elicit model-generated reasoning chains:

1.

StrategyQA

Geva et al. (2021)
: Yes/no questions that require a diverse set of reasoning skills and applying implicit knowledge.

2.

MuSiQue

Trivedi et al. (2022)
: Multi-hop reasoning questions with free-text entity answers, generated based on paragraphs from Wikipedia. For our dataset, we consider the subset of 2-hop questions, as we found qualitatively that the 3-hop and 4-hop questions are often unnatural and hard to understand.

3.

Sports Understanding

Srivastava et al. (2023)
: Yes/no questions that require reasoning about knowledge on sports players, leagues, and sports maneuvers.

4.

Fermi

Kalyan et al. (2021)
: Estimation questions with numerical answers that require both knowledge and reasoning to answer. The questions are designed to have no clear gold answers—they are exercises of common-sense reasoning and numerical estimation, e.g., “How much water does a school use in a week?”

Examples from each source are provided in
Table

5 (
Appendix

A
).
This diverse set of tasks provides a variety of question types, knowledge and reasoning requirements, and answer formats (binary, numerical and free-text entities). The questions were sampled randomly from the evaluation sets of each dataset and evenly split across the four datasets.

We use three different LMs to generate CoT answers: Flan-PaLM-540B
Chung et al. (2022)
, GPT-3
(text-davinci-003, Brown et al.,
2020 )
 and Flan-UL2-20B
Tay et al. (2023)
. We prioritized a variety in the models, with two large-size high-performing models with different pretraining data, and one smaller-size, weaker model, in order to gather a variety of CoT answers.
CoT prompt demonstrations were written according to standard practices
Wei et al. (2023)
, with in-domain examples for each dataset taken from the dataset’s training set, and designed to be simple and informative.
A subset of the questions from each dataset (one-fourth) were answered by all three models with three separate CoT answers, to serve as a base for analyses that require multiple answers per question, while the rest were answered by each model once in equal proportions (one-fourth each). Our goal in this methodology was to maximize the flexibility of the dataset and potential for analyses and evaluations, for as many LMs and verifiers as possible. Specifically, we aimed to collect a sufficient variety of answers,
both correct and incorrect
, from a practical and realistic distribution.

Step 2: Evidence Retrieval.

For attribution verification, we use Wikipedia as an external knowledge source and retrieve three paragraphs for each attribution step. StrategyQA, MuSiQue, and Sports Understanding are well-supported by Wikipedia, while Fermi is explicitly designed to be difficult to support, giving a variety of cases.
To promote the retrieval of supporting paragraphs, we mix dense retrieval and lexical-based retrieval, fetching two paragraphs with GTR
Ni et al. (2021)
 and one with BM25
Zaragoza et al. (2004)
. In addition, retrieval is done using decontextualized versions of the CoT steps, generated by the decontextualization model of
Choi et al. (2021)
 which replaces co-referenced pronouns with explicit entity mentions.

Step 3: Annotation.

We use a pool of 13 English-speaking annotators, and collect 5 annotations per question and its corresponding CoT answer, for each of our two tasks (see
Section

3 ).
A small portion of the labels (approx. 5%) were annotated by the authors of this work (3 annotations per sub-task), to fill any gaps in examples that were not fully annotated for technical reasons.

Reveal
-Eval

Reveal
-Open

Questions

704

205

CoT answers

1002

224

CoT steps

3360

847

Avg. steps per CoT

3.4

5.1

Attribution steps

1979

485

Step-evidence pairs

3502

745

Avg. evidence length (words)

103

103

Logic steps

1250

306

Fully attributable step-evidence pairs

864

–

Logically correct steps

1063

–

Fully correct CoT answers

200

–

Table 1:
Quantities for various properties of
Reveal
.

Figure 5:
Statistics for the attribution task in
Reveal
-Eval (
Section

5 ). Left: Label distributions for each step or step-evidence pair. Right: Statistics for the number of retrieved evidence passages for each attribution step until a supporting or contradicting evidence was found (up to 3).

Justifications and Quality Validation.

Each annotation in
Reveal
 is accompanied by a free-text justification written by its annotator. Those justifications serve two goals: they allow us to easily monitor the annotation process by leaning into the annotators thought process and provide them with meaningful feedback
Nangia et al. (2021)
, and serve as a valuable resource on their own which we leave to be explored in future work. We maintained a high level of quality for these justifications, such that they do not collapse to templated answers or provide insufficient information. Examples of these justifications are given in
Figure

4 .

In addition,
we performed three pilot rounds for annotator selection, annotator training, and task improvement, all to maintain a high quality bar for the collected dataset (the pilot annotations were discarded from the final dataset). Finally, we split the dataset into two subsets,
Reveal
-Eval and
Reveal
-Open, where the latter contains low-confidence labels that received lower inter-annotator agreement (see
Section

5 ).