1 Introduction

Complex reasoning tasks involve answering questions that require multiple steps of reasoning
Welbl et al. (2018); Talmor and Berant (2018)
. Addressing these questions may require open-domain knowledge
Geva et al. (2021)
, mathematical reasoning
Cobbe et al. (2021); Hendrycks et al. (2021)
, logic
Dalvi et al. (2021)
, and so on.
Reasoning chains—breaking the task into multiple steps explicitly—is useful for improving performance in such tasks, with LMs demonstrating better performance when encouraged to generate the reasoning chain behind their answer
Lampinen et al. (2022); Zelikman et al. (2022); Hu et al. (2023)
, commonly implemented via Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting
(Wei et al.,
2023 , see
Figure

1 for an example)
.

Evaluation in such settings is traditionally limited to evaluating only whether the final answer is correct
Chowdhery et al. (2022); Wei et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023)
.
However, correct reasoning chains have been shown to be correlated with better final answers
Jung et al. (2022)
, with recent literature proposing automatic methods for verifying the quality of the reasoning chains themselves along various axes such as informativeness, relevance, factuality and logical correctness
Golovneva et al. (2023); Press et al. (2023); Opitz and Frank (2021); Leiter et al. (2022)
. While such verification methods are a promising direction for improving reasoning in LLMs, it is not clear how to evaluate them due to the lack of high-quality, step-level annotated data, and collecting such data was shown to be difficult (in terms of reaching high inter-annotator agreement) and costly
Golovneva et al. (2023)
.

Figure 1:
We collect
Reveal
, an evaluation benchmark for the task of verifying reasoning chains in Chain-of-Thought format, which checks whether a reasoning chain is a correct justification to the final answer (importantly, the answer can be correct even if the reasoning is incorrect, as in the example above). The figure shows four verifiers (middle) verifying the correctness of a CoT (left). We use the dataset to benchmark multiple verifiers (right).

Figure 2:
A flowchart of our protocol for verifying reasoning correctness step-by-step (
Section

2 ).

Figure 3:
A
Reveal
 instance, with labels for step type, relevance, and correctness (attribution to a source or logical correctness from previous steps).
Each label is accompanied by a high-quality free-text justification (shown in
Figure

4 ).
We retrieve up to three evidence paragraphs, until a non-“unsupported” evidence is found. For Step (4) logical correctness is undefined, since it follows a logically incorrect step (Step 3).

We present
Reveal
 (
Reasoning Verification Evaluation
), an evaluation benchmark for complex reasoning verifiers.
1 1
1 At
huggingface.co/datasets/google/reveal
. We adopt practices by
Jacovi et al. (
2023a
)
 against data contamination and request that any future redistribution or usage of the data respects the same constraints.

Reveal
 covers a diverse set of reasoning skills, complexity levels, and knowledge domains.
It contains 704 unique questions from 4 popular QA datasets, and 1,002 CoT answers generated by 3 language models, consisting of 3,360 CoT steps in total.

Each step is first labeled for relevance with respect to the final answer, and then whether the step is an attribution step (introduces factual knowledge which can be attributed to a source), a logical step (introduces logical inference from previous steps) or both. For attribution steps, we collect labels for correctness to retrieved Wikipedia paragraphs given as evidence (with full support, partial support, contradiction, or no-support as labels). For logical steps, we label for logical correctness. Each label includes free-text justifications written by the annotators. An illustrative instance from the dataset is shown in
Figures

3 and
4 . We split the dataset into
Reveal
-Eval, the main evaluation benchmark containing high inter-annotator-agreement labels, and
Reveal
-Open, a smaller set of interesting borderline cases with open labels due to low inter-annotator agreement. In
Section

5 we describe the dataset, and report fine-grained analyses of non-attributable steps in
Reveal
-Eval (i.e., evidence that supports or contradicts them was not found) and of disagreement categories in
Reveal
-Open.

Reveal
 supports versatile evaluation settings, for example: (1) Attribution steps, along with their evidence, can serve as a high-quality Natural Language Inference
(NLI, Dagan et al.,
2005 ; Bowman et al.,
2015 )
 benchmark in a setting of fact-checking LM outputs
Gao et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023)
; (2) CoT verifiers can be evaluated at the level of individual steps, or (3) at the level of full CoT answers; (4) Each label in the data contains five free-text justifications (one per annotator), which can accommodate research around the generation of explanations and justifications, or be used to understand nuance in borderline cases.

As we focus on the evaluation of step-level validation in complex reasoning, in
Section

6 we report the performance of multiple up-to-date verification baselines,
leveraging NLI classifiers, GPT-3 and PaLM 2,
showing much room for improvement in current state-of-the-art solutions. In particular, verifiers struggle at classifying whether a step conveys correct logical inference from previous steps.

In summary, this work includes the following contributions: (I) A protocol for step-by-step verification of reasoning chains (§
2 ); (II) An annotation schema to reliably execute the protocol with human annotators (§
3 ); (III) A new benchmark dataset for evaluating automatic reasoning chain verifiers (§
4 , §
5 ); (IV) Detailed analyses of challenges in retrieving evidence to knowledge claims in reasoning and documentation of disagreements in the data (§
5 ); (V) A study on the challenges for current verifiers (
Section

6 ). These contributions advance the research on verification of reasoning chains and methods for correctly reasoning about complex questions.