9 Limitations

Evidence retrieval.

Our work focuses on evaluation of verifiers that receive evidence as input—i.e., in the task of attribution to a given source, rather than the task of fact-checking where evidence retrieval is explicitly part of the task. As such, we can only evaluate verifiers that also operate on specific given evidence, rather than fact-chekers that perform evidence retrieval themselves. Additionally, for some of the knowledge claims in the dataset labeled as “unsupported”, it is possible that there exists evidence that will support or contradict them, which our retriever did not surface. We note, however, that the goal of the dataset is to simply collect a sufficiently wide variety of cases on which to evaluate verifiers, rather than to evaluate the CoT itself using an “ideal” retriever, and the labels in the dataset are well-defined for the specific evidence passages used.

Fermi and Wikipedia evidence.

We retrieve evidence against Wikipedia, in the interest of having clean and reliable evidence, and due to the fact that StrategyQA, MuSiQue and Sports Understanding are sufficiently addressed by Wikipedia knowledge. However, Fermi is a dataset which is explicitly designed to require knowledge that is difficult to attribute or measure, and require difficult inference for both knowledge and logic claims. As such, Fermi is by design not well-addressed by Wikipedia retrieval. We chose Fermi as one of our four datasets in order to have sufficient variety in the data for claims that are very difficult to support.

Reasoning chains in formats other than Chain-of-Thought.

Our dataset uses CoT as a writing style for reasoning chains, due to its popularity and sentence structure that allows convenient step separation. It is of course possible to reason about complex questions in other ways, such as using sentences that combine multiple facts together, or claims that combine knowledge and logic together, and so on. Such examples can be considered a more difficult case for reasoning verification, as they will potentially require an additional solution for extracting atomic claims from the reasoning chain. CoT-format chains, such as in our dataset, do not have this requirement.