2 Related work and background

2.1 Misbehavior monitoring

With large models now widely used in programming
openai2025competitiveprogramminglargereasoning
, education
wang2024largelanguagemodelseducation
, and medical applications
liu2024surveymedicallargelanguage
, identifying and mitigating model misbehaviors such as complying with harmful requests, hallucination, and reward hacking has become critically important. Previous work has focused on identifying whether models are misaligned with human preferences by detecting whether they fail to reject harmful requests, often through pattern matching for refusal phrases like “Sorry, I cannot …”
DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2307-15043
;
samvelyan2024rainbow
.

However, as models’ capabilities grow and their deployment scenarios become more complex, misbehaviors can become increasingly sophisticated and implicit
lynch2025agentic
. For example, models may exhibit situational awareness and have different alignment performance during inference and behave differently toward free-tier versus paid users
greenblatt2024alignment
, or perform well on open-ended questions while struggling to select safe options in multiple choice scenarios
DBLP:conf/naacl/WangTHLZZMJQW24
. This means misbehaviors may be deeply hidden and only triggered by specific factors, making it impossible to anticipate all problematic cases through simple language patterns alone. Consequently, researchers have turned to examining models’ internal activations and representations.

Previous work has identified attention heads corresponding to models’ alignment
zhou2025on
 and hallucination
DBLP:conf/iclr/SunZ0XZYSL25
, enabling identification and intervention of specific attention patterns associated with misbehaviors.
DBLP:journals/corr/abs-2310-01405
 proposed that linear representation vectors corresponding to harmfulness and dishonesty exist in models’ latent spaces, motivating subsequent work on identifying and steering model misbehaviors using these vectors
parksteer
;
xu2024uncovering
;
arditi2024refusal
. However, these methods cannot be easily understood by humans, and internal activations can sometimes be misaligned with external behaviors
lindsey2025biology
. In this paper, we investigate the potential and challenges of a new form of misbehavior monitor
bakermonitoring
;
korbak2025chain
: monitoring through models’ self-explanation, which offers human language-based attribution.

2.2 CoT faithfulness

As LLMs increasingly become promising approaches for solving complex tasks and giving externalized reasoning, concerns around the faithfulness of their CoT and self-explanations have become more prominent: whether these models consistently and honestly reveal the factors that drive their decisions. Previous work has demonstrated widespread unfaithfulness in CoT reasoning.
turpin2023language
 and
Denison2024SycophancyTS
 found that Large Language Models’ final decisions can be highly influenced by biasing features such as “answer of demonstration in few-shot is always A” or cues like “suggested answers by user” from inputs. However, the CoT of LLMs is systematically unfaithful: they rarely honestly acknowledge that they rely on these triggers for decision-making.
chen2024reasoning
 and
arcuschin2025chainofthoughtreasoningwildfaithful
 further explored this phenomenon in LRMs and found they might first reach a final decision like “always say yes” then generate post-hoc rationalizations to justify their outputs, rather than telling the real factor. While mitigating the unfaithfulness problem remains an open challenge, the extended thinking stage of LLMs presents a new opportunity to monitor model behavior, particularly misbehaviors such as reward hacking
everitt2021reward
;
skalse2022defining
;
wang2025cream
;
bakermonitoring
 and scheming
Denison2024SycophancyTS
;
wang2024fake
.