Appendix B
Generalizing to an alternative reasoning model

B.1
Measuring counterfactual influence

To assess the generalizability of our counterfactual importance findings, we replicated our resampling methodology on R1-Distill-Llama-8B, applying the same experimental parameters (e.g., temperature =
0.6 0.6
 and top-p =
0.95 0.95
) used for R1-Distill-Qwen-14B. We collected 100 rollouts for 20 correct and 20 incorrect base solutions using the identical question set described in Section
2 .

The resampling accuracy trajectories for R1-Distill-Llama-8B (Figure
9 ) demonstrate patterns that are similar to those observed in R1-Distill-Qwen-14B (Figure
2 ). Specifically, we observe similar characteristic accuracy fluctuations throughout the reasoning traces, with notable spikes and dips occurring at sentences corresponding to critical reasoning transitions.

Figure
10 shows that R1-Distill-Llama-8B exhibits similar sentence category effects whereby
plan generation
 and
uncertainty management
 sentences demonstrate higher counterfactual importance compared to
active computation
 and
fact retrieval
 sentences (see Figure
3 for R1-Distill-Qwen-14B).

This cross-model validation supports our claim that reasoning traces are structured around high-level organizational sentences rather than low-level computational steps. The consistency of counterfactual importance patterns suggests that our sentence-level attribution framework captures fundamental properties of chain-of-thought reasoning that generalize beyond specific model implementations.

Figure 9:
Accuracy over 100 rollouts at each sentence for (
A
) one correct and (
B
) one incorrect base solution for R1-Distill-Llama-8B. Red dots mark significant spikes or dips. Local minima and maxima sentences are annotated with category initials. Our analyses focus on the counterfactual KL-divergence between sentences, but resampling accuracy is visualized here as it is more intuitive.

Figure 10:
The mean of each sentence category for (
A
) forced-answer importance and (
B
) counterfactual importance for R1-Distill-Llama-8B, per the resampling method, plotted against the sentence category’s mean position in the reasoning trace. Only the 5 most common sentence types are shown.

B.2
Attention aggregation

R1-Distill-Llama-8B displayed receiver-head patterns largely consistent with those of R1-Distill-Qwen-14B. The histogram of attention heads’ vertical-attention scores displays a right tail, indicating that some attention heads tend to particularly focus attention on a subset of sentences (Figure
12 A). Interestingly, the R1-Distill-Qwen-14B receiver-heads tended to be more frequent in later layers (see below, Figure
19 ), which was not evident in R1-Distill-Llama-8B (Figure
11 ).

The R1-Distill-Qwen-14B and R1-Distill-Llama-8B receiver heads displayed consistent patterns related to sentence types, such that
plan generation
,
uncertainty management
, and
self checking
 sentences received heightened attention; although visually, the differences to
fact retrieval
 and
active computation
 may be less prominent, paired t-tests (paired with respect to a given response) showed that
plan generation
 and
uncertainty management
 always significantly surpassed
fact retrieval
 and
active computation
 (four paired t-tests:
p
p
s
≤
.01
\leq.01
).

No R1-Distill-Llama-8B results are provided for the attention suppression analysis, as that method was principally used for the case study, and no new case study was performed for R1-Distill-Llama-8B.

Figure 11:
The plots here show the vertical-attention score patterns associated with the R1-Distill-Llama-8B data.
A.
 This histogram shows the kurtosis values across all attention heads, median across all reasoning traces; parallels Figure
4 based on the R1-Qwen-14B data.
B.
 This scatterplot shows the kurtosis of each head’s vertical-attention score, organized by layer. Figure
19 is the R1-Distill-Qwen-14B version of this figure, which showed an upward trend into later layers that is not evident here.

Figure 12:
Based on the R1-Distill-Llama-8B data, the boxplot shows the average top-64 receiver-head score for each sentence type. The boxes correspond to the interquartile range across different reasoning traces. Figure
5 is the R1-Distill-Qwen-14B version of this figure; note that for the R1-Distill-Qwen-14B figure, the top-16 heads were used. We found that for Llama 8B, examining the top-64 heads yielded more pronounced differences, although the sentence types with the highest scores remain the same.