8 Discussion and Limitations

This work presents initial steps towards a principled decomposition of reasoning traces with a focus on identifying thought anchors: sentences with outsized importance on the model’s final response, specific future sentences, and downstream reasoning trajectory. We have also begun unpacking the attentional mechanisms associated with these important sentences. We expect that understanding thought anchors will be critical for interpreting reasoning models and ensuring their safety.

While some research raises valid concerns that CoT text can be unfaithful to the model’s underlying computation
(Lanham et al.,
2023b
; Chen et al.,
2025 )
, our results show CoT text is mechanistically relevant and interpretable. For example, sentences categorized as
plan generation
 and
uncertainty management
 consistently exhibit higher counterfactual importance in our resampling analyses and receive more focused attention from receiver heads. This demonstrates a link between what a sentence says and its functional role in the computation, and this type of correspondence supports arguments on the value of CoT legibility
(Korbak et al.,
2025 )
.

A primary limitation of our resampling approach is its computational cost. In this work, we resampled 100 times per sentence to achieve fairly precise estimates (in terms of final-answer accuracy, 95% CI corresponds to at worst
±
10 %
\pm 10\%
), which was sufficient to identify pivotal moments in the case study (Figure
2 A). However, for analyses focusing on aggregate patterns across many CoTs, fewer resamples for any one CoT may suffice. Additionally, future work could develop adaptive resampling strategies that allocate more computational budget to potentially pivotal moments in the trace, maximizing precision while minimizing cost.

We view this as preliminary work. Our analyses require refinement to fully grapple with how downstream sentences may be overdetermined by different trajectories in a reasoning trace or independent sufficient causes. Additionally, we do not formally examine the role of error correction. Our receiver-head analyses are confounded by a sentence’s position in the reasoning trace (see
Section
˜
C.4
). Further, our attention-suppression work is limited because it effectively requires the model to process out-of-distribution information.

Despite these limitations, we believe that we have demonstrated that our metrics are an advance on prior work, interrupting models and forcing final answers. The surprising degree of shared structure we have found across our three methods illustrates the potential value of future work in this area and points to the possibility of more powerful interpretability techniques to come.