5 Sentence-sentence causal links

5.1 Approach

We next focused on how key sentences influence specific subsequent sentences. We used a sentence-masking strategy,
suppressing all attention (all heads) to a given sentence and examining how this impacts future sentences, measured using the KL divergence between token logits with or without masking. The overall effect on a future sentence is the average of its token log-KL divergences. We normalize this score by subtracting the latter sentence’s average causal effect from all prior sentences. Suppressing attention is mostly equivalent to omitting a sentence from a CoT, only differing in positional embeddings; computing the causal graph as so can be done with LLM APIs that return logits without exposing attention.
Appendix
˜
M
 provides pseudocode for generating the causal graph.

Our masking approach assumes (i) token logits capture a sentence’s semantic content and (ii) masking sentences does not problematically induce out-of-distribution behavior. We evaluated these assumptions by correlating the sentence-sentence scores with those from an alternative strategy based on our counterfactual resampling method, which assesses how resampling
S
i
S_{i}
 with
T
i
T_{i}
 (
S
≉
T
S\not\approx T
) influences the likelihood of
S
j
S_{j}
 appearing. This measure positively correlates with the scores from the masking- & logits-based strategy (detailed further in
appendix
˜
N
), suggesting that logits indeed track semantics despite simulating out-of-distribution behavior. We continue with the sentence-masking approach because it requires
∼
\sim
100x less compute than resampling, increasing scalability.

5.2 Case study

We begin with a small-scale investigation to provide intuition for our sentence-sentence measure and motivate more systematic tests. We continue our initial case study (
Section
˜
2.4 ), but here, we focus
on three local maxima in the sentence-masking graph (Figure
6 ), which align closely with the sentences implicated as important by receiver-heads (see further details on the case study in
Section
˜
C.3
):

•

(Sentences: 12 → 43)
 After suggesting the answer “20 bits”, the model decides to begin verifying it (Sentence 12). Verification leads to a different solution, “19 bits” (Sentence 43). Between these key sentences, most of the intermediate text is performing arithmetic.

•

(Sentences: 44 → 65)
 Noticing the discrepancy (Sentence 44), the model decides to check its calculations. It finds that they are correct, and the discrepancy remains (Sentence 65).

•

(Sentences: 12 → 66)
 The model realizes that its initial suspicion about leading zeroes (Sentence 12) is justified and states that this is the reason for the discrepancy (Sentence 66).

These connections point to an interpretable scaffold reflecting computations on the pursuit of intermediate results, the execution of self-correction subroutines, and the synthesis of prior statements.

Figure 6:
For the correct-answer CoT of Problem #4682, the matrix shows the effect of masking one sentence (x-axis) on a future sentence’s logits (y-axis). Darker colors indicate higher values.

5.3 Open source interface

We released an open source interface (
thought-anchors.com
)
for visualizing reasoning traces and comparing alternative rollouts. We show our proof-of-concept interface in Figure
1 C, where important sentences are represented by larger nodes and causal connections between sentences are shown with dashed gray lines. The tool aims to benefit interpretability and unwanted behavior debugging.