7 Discussion

We discuss briefly the main insights yielded by the study with details on the effect of the deception dilution attack and further discussion included in Appendix
D

Full averaging is an effective monitoring technique.

Full averaging performs well across different datasets, confirming the findings of Goldowsky-Dill et al. (2025). The Pairs probe particularly shows good performance across all datasets we tested. Full averaging is comparable to Critical Averaging across most datasets, even in scenarios specifically designed to challenge it (such as deception dilution). By contrast, Peak Activation and the Follow-up monitors consistently underperform compared to Full Averaging.

Some probes generalize far out of distribution

Despite their simple training setup, the Pairs probe performs robustly across all tested datasets and appears to reliably capture deceptive intent, even in the challenging Backdoors setting, which features both significant distributional shift and only implicit deception (i.e., the assistant passes along unsafe code to the user provided in the system prompt). By contrast, the RP probe fails on this extension to Backdoors (Full-Average AUROC  0.55).

Existing probes offer weak but encouraging black-to-white
performance boosts for reasoning methods.

A modest black-to-white performance boost is seen across datasets with the exception of the Backdoors setting in which White-box Reasoning is strictly worse than the black-box monitor alone. We suspect that Backdoors is a particularly challenging setting to expect black-to-white performance boosts: Firstly, Black-box Reasoning has an advantage in this datasets that it lacks in the other datasets, namely that the veracity of the assistant’s response is, in principle, determinable solely from the public tokens. By contrast, in the other datasets, the veracity depends on private tokens, either in the system prompt or in the assistant’s scratchpad reasoning. Secondly, the dataset consists in code, whereas other datasets are much more similar to the text on the probes were originally trained on.

The probe activation is largely spread out over the entire response, not concentrated on the deceptive claims.

The probes capture deception across the entire response, not just isolated false claims. Full Averaging thus retains much of the signal even amid dilution. This is also evidenced in that methods sensitive to a single token’s activation (eg. Peak Activation, and Yes/No Follow Up) perform poorly, suggesting the probes don’t indicate which parts of a response are deceptive. In Dilution, the probe activations remain elevated even in the factually correct statements, further supporting the claim that the existing probes indicate deception somewhere in the response.