Evaluating the reasoning capabilities of LLMs is
crucial for understanding their potential and limitations.
ROSCOE (Golovneva et al., 2022) introduces
a semantic comparison-based multi-step reasoning
accuracy evaluation benchmark. However,
recent research suggests that labeled data cannot
be assumed to cover all possible solution paths exhaustively
(Wang et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2024b).
To address this, Xia et al. (2024b) uses PRMs or
Critic models to evaluate step-level reasoning accuracy.
However, PRMs are not always accurate in
assessing process-level data, underscoring the need
for a comprehensive evaluation benchmark. While
other benchmarks (Liu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024a;
Lin et al., 2024; Su et al., 2024b) exist, they are
not tailored for PRMs and can’t assess step-level
reasoning. Some works (Zeng et al., 2023, 2024b;
Yan et al., 2024) use LLMs to evaluate reasoning
steps, but they often overlook implicit error types.
Existing error classification works are not specific
to PRMs and lack fine-grained step-level labels (Li
et al., 2024b). To address these gaps, we propose
PRMBENCH, a solution that offers fine-grained
evaluation and detects various error types.

• Soundness assesses the accuracy of the rewards

produced by PRMs. As discussed in Section 1,
errors in reasoning can vary in both causes and
manifestations (Li et al., 2024b). Therefore, we
evaluate not only the correctness of rewards but
also the fine-grained performance across different
error types and their nuances.

• Sensitivity measures PRMs’ robustness to details,
such as critical conditions or implicit requirements.
Sensitivity is vital for ensuring logical
completeness and resilience to misleading
information (Wen et al., 2025), contributing to
the overall robustness of PRMs.

Each domain is further divided into detailed subcategories
for a more granular evaluation, which is
discussed in detail below. The overall structure of
PRMBENCH along with representative examples
of each sub-category are illustrated in Figure 2,
and the details of every evaluation category and
sub-category are shown in Appendix A.1.