1 Introduction

Trustworthy evaluations of dangerous capabilities are increasingly important for determining whether an AI model is safe to deploy
Phuong et al. (2024)
. A necessary condition for trustworthiness is to ensure that models or their developers do not cheat on these tests to get models deployed. One empirically demonstrated threat is
sandbagging
, the strategic underperformance on a capability evaluation, where a model intentionally exhibits lower capability than its actual capability
(van der Weij et al.,
2025 ; Benton et al.,
2024 ; Meinke et al.,
2025 )
. This leads to an underestimation of the dangerous capabilities and risks associated with a model, thus directly undermines safety and governance decisions.

One promising defense against sandbagging is by monitoring a model’s chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. By letting models plan step-by-step to solve complex tasks, CoT exposes the model’s thought process, which could help auditors understand the model’s intentions and catch unsafe behaviors. With the development of reasoning models trained to always give a CoT before answering
OpenAI (2024); DeepSeek-AI (2025)
, CoT monitoring has become increasingly relevant for safety and received a surge of attention from frontier labs
Guan et al. (2025); Anthropic Alignment Science Team (2025); Emmons et al. (2025); Korbak et al. (2025)
.

Recent studies show that CoT monitoring is insufficient to catch all unsafe behaviors, including reward-hacking
Baker et al. (2025); Chen et al. (2025)
 and sabotaging ML research tasks
Gasteiger et al. (2025)
. They do so by prompting models to follow certain attack policies or fine-tuning models against the CoT monitor. We build on this and make several contributions that differ from previous work.

Our contributions are:

1.

We evaluate the capability of models to covertly sandbag on dangerous capability evaluations. We focus on multiple-choice questions (MCQs) due to their ease of use and prevalence
Lin et al. (2022); Perez et al. (2022); Li et al. (2024); Laurent et al. (2024); Götting et al. (2025)
. Unlike previous work, we do not instruct models to follow a particular attack policy against the monitor, but instead manipulate the
awareness
 of sandbaggers to monitoring. This lets us evaluate the model’s capability to
generate
 attack policies and lets us
discover
 attack policies using models.

2.

We find that even open-source models as small as 32B can covertly sandbag against a more powerful CoT monitor.

3.

We find that when focusing on being covert to bypass the monitor, the models’ sandbagging success drops, suggesting that the two interfere. More capable models occupy a higher sandbagging success–covertness trade-off frontier.

4.

We find a rich attack surface against CoT monitoring and contribute five covert sandbagging attack policies generated by models, which may be used to strengthen monitoring in a control setting
Greenblatt et al. (2024)
.