Appendix C
Proposals for future work

C.1
Adversarial Games

One artificial class of settings that might both provide good evidence for a lie detector working and a good setting to hill climb on to develop better lie detectors are adversarial games.

These are games where there is incentive for players to strategically lie sometimes, and the win rate of a player correlates well with how well they can lie. Provided each player is equally capable of lying, we can turn this into an evaluation of a lie detector via giving players access to “lie detector” tools. One should expect that the win rate in a 2-player game where neither or both have lie detector tools to be 50%, but the win rate to be skewed if only one player is given access to a lie detector.

The key feature that makes games attractive is that you do not necessarily have to label individual examples of deception in order to demonstrate that giving the detector to one player provides an advantage.

Some care will need to be taken to ensure that

•

The lie detector is not overfit to the scenario. For instance, in the case of the game werewolf, whether lying is a good strategy is quite correlated with whether you are a werewolf or not. It would be easy to train a lie detector that was a simple check for this environmental feature. This could probably be addressed by evaluating generalisation
across related games or variations of the game.

•

A practical difficulty with games based settings that we encountered is that current models might struggle to lie without access to a scratchpad. And if models are given access to each other’s private scratchpads, it seems highly likely that they will be able to spot each other’s lies. As such, it might be difficult to come up with an interesting game based setting where this baseline is beatable: i.e it’s important to assess rigorously that internal access is an improvement over CoT access.

It is also possible to study this in non-symmetric games. Game-like settings, such as debate, might also be an interesting place to study this sort of approach.

C.2
See what you can learn from current
benchmarks

Much of this work was carried out by studying existing benchmarks deeply. We think there is more scope for this sort of work.

As an example, we think that studying how much lie detection methods generalise between environments could be an interesting way of studying how much actual ‘lying’ behaviour in text only models is actually using consistent machinery, in a way discussed in
Section
˜
5 . For instance, we might find that detectors which work on role-playing environments fail in some other environments. We think that such a setup might be a good place to obtain empirical feedback on the stability of model beliefs, for example.

C.3
Coherence of model
beliefs

A key difficulty we described in
Section
˜
4 is how to determine whether a model really has a belief in a particular context. In a neutral context, or one which doesn’t induce deception, it’s fairly straightforward to just define belief as the models’ disposition to answer in a consistent way. However, this introduces uncertainty if we introduce personas which induce the models to assert different beliefs; does this mean that the persona induces lying, that the persona modifies the beliefs of the model, or the model is roleplaying as the persona without genuine intent?

We think a good outcome would be a pair of contrasting case studies; one of a very stable belief across contexts, and another which is (counter-intuitively) very context sensitive, and maybe some analysis of how existing scenarios (e.g MASK and convincing game) scenarios are affected by this.

Slocum et al. (2025)
 provide some interesting methodologies for testing model beliefs in practice.