6 Conclusion

In this work, we have outlined a series of difficulties in establishing evaluation environments for deception detectors in which we are able to unambiguously label deceptive intent. We argue such difficulties manifest in practice in existing works attempting to study deception detection, and that the lack of such unambiguous environments are currently the core blocker to progress in detecting strategic deception. We additionally discussed some potential and common workarounds to these problems. While some of these may lead to productive, orthogonal research directions, we do not think any of them entirely solve the problem.

While we have been critical of whether previously introduced benchmarks like MASK
(Ren et al.,
2025 )
 and Liars Bench
(Kretschmar et al.,
2025 )
 disambiguate strategic deception from other categories, we emphasize that this work is highly valuable. These benchmarks were highly informative in our analysis that we present here, and were extremely natural first steps to try in building deception environments. In particular, we think that the axes of variation outlined in Liars Bench, where evaluations are varied along the axes of the object of belief and the reason for lying, are complementary to the levels of deception we outline. Future work aiming to understand how mechanisms for deception generalise across different levels of deception would likely benefit from considering coverage along these axes as well.

Despite defending these reasons for pessimism regarding current evaluations, we do not believe these difficulties are insurmountable, nor do we think the broader goal of detecting deception is hopeless. The risks posed by advanced AI systems capable of subverting controls or gaming evaluations are significant, making this research area vital in spite of its difficulty. Just as strategic deception is an identifiable phenomenon in intelligent animals, we believe it is, in principle, identifiable in AI systems when or if they exhibit it. The pessimism is not about the impossibility of the task, but the inadequacy of our current “petri dish” examples to serve as ground truth for reliable detectors.

Moving forward, we see several promising avenues that address or sidestep these conceptual hurdles. Firstly, being aware of these difficulties we hope will lead to future environments being higher quality and less fraught. Even currently existing environments might be strengthened considerably by considering how to eliminate some of the problems we outline: for example, conducting further experimentation to rule out the risk of role-play, or studying how model beliefs are modified by context in order to ensure that environments cause deception rather than modifying belief.

Second, we are optimistic about researching deception ‘in the wild,’ through studying e.g. reward hacking in complex agentic environments, as these environments may offer more robust examples of goal-directed deceptive behaviour than a single-turn conversational setup. Finally, we are excited about more work attempting to gain a more principled understanding of how model beliefs persist (or fail to persist) across different contexts, which we think is a crucial prerequisite to studying coherence of model beliefs and deception in general. We discuss more concrete proposals for future work in Appendix
C
.