4 Language Models, Deception and Intentionality

Many of the difficulties discussed in
Section
˜
2 were related to the difficulty of attributing
beliefs
 to a language model: whether a behaviour is strategic or reflexive deception hinges on the beliefs of the deceiver, and similarly the issues with roleplaying and belief modification hinge on what the beliefs of a model about a particular scenario are. In this section, we first discuss a pragmatic definition of belief attribution we find helpful, and then discuss problems we face in applying it in practice in language models.

Attributing states like beliefs to an agent can be thought of as taking the
intentional stance
7 7
7 This is not the only view of how agents have beliefs. Some philosophers have defended
representationalist
 notions of belief, the notion that to properly have a belief, an agent must have some internal structure which reflects the proposition which the agent believes: for example, a sentence expressing that proposition in some internal language of thought. However, we take a functional or interpretational view of beliefs, partly because it’s more liberal; a representational view of beliefs would argue that having an explicit representation of belief X is both necessary and sufficient for an agent to believe X. In contrast, under the intentional stance view, having an explicit representation would perhaps be sufficient for the agent to believe X, but not necessary.
: predicting the behaviour of the system by modelling it as a rational agent with a given set of beliefs, desires and so on that are consistent with the observed behaviour. We take a pragmatic approach to the attribution of such states: a system
has
 a mental state, like a belief, to the extent that
we can predict its behaviour
 by modelling it as an intentional agent with that belief (as outlined by
(Dennett,
1989 )
). Discussions of these intentional states are central to discussion about deception, because an agent which has no
beliefs
 can’t really mislead: the risk case for scheming and deception is intrinsically intentional. For instance, an agent
knows
 it’s in training, and
wants
 a particular outcome, so it
decides
 to act in a certain way (for example, as in
Greenblatt et al. (2024)
).
8 8
8 We could try to avoid all discussion of intentional states, and focus entirely on behavioural evaluations. As mentioned, avoiding talk of mental states makes it difficult to consider strategic deception at all, as modelling an agent as deceptive is an intentional description, but it would be one possible approach. For instance, we could just try and measure if a model changes its behaviour when we vary how salient the fact it is in an evaluation is, or detect when the model outputs a false statement, regardless of the model’s beliefs. This might be a promising practical approach, although we note that intentional states are ultimately grounded in behaviour, because they yield predictions of how an agent would behave in counterfactual situations). Such an approach would not strictly be a ‘deception detector’, but maybe this would be a more fruitful direction, given the difficulties involved in attacking deception directly.
 Note that it’s at least conceivable that an agent which can be well described in intentional language might not have easily accessible internal representations of this fact: see
Section
˜
5 for more discussion.

We find the
intentional triad
 to be a helpful abstraction. A rational agent has
desires
 and
beliefs
 and takes
actions
. Knowledge about two of these often lets us make predictions about the third (
Figure
˜
6 ). If I know what you believe and what you want, I can make some reasonable guesses about what you will do.
9 9
9 Note that this method does not necessarily pin down the beliefs and goals of an agent uniquely: many similar attributions of beliefs might produce identical predictions in the situations we care about, and there may be no ‘ground truth’ about which one a system really has. This is not to say that there is
no
 way of distinguishing between beliefs, or that beliefs are meaningless, just that there might be limits to how specific you can be when pinning down the ‘actual content’ of a belief. A classic example: say I get to the office, and realise I have forgotten my keycard. You ask me where it is, and I say I left it at home. What exactly is the content of the belief that I left it at home: do I believe I left it on the bed? In the bedroom? In the cupboard? On a flat surface somewhere? In my coat pocket? Some combination of these? The point is that there are a lot of propositions that could in principle describe my belief, and it’s not obvious that there is a deeper ground truth about precisely
which
 of these propositions I do, in fact, believe: there is probably a residual ‘indeterminacy of translation’ of one set of beliefs into another.

Modelling language models via the intentional stance is often pragmatically helpful: We colloquially do this all the time
(Angelou,
2024 )
. Consider: “Gemini is getting confused because it
thinks
 that I’m using virtualenv, but I’m actually using poetry in this project; I should put that in the prompt and try again”: this attribution of beliefs and goals is effortless, and often yields valuable predictions about how to get the actions we want from the model.

However, in some cases making intentional attributions about language models can be significantly harder than modelling humans or animals.

Model beliefs are not stable and are far more context dependent than animal or human beliefs.
 As discussed in
Section
˜
2.2 and
Section
˜
2.3 : Language model beliefs are easily modified by changing the context, and language models readily interpret descriptions of a situation as instructions to roleplay. This can make it challenging to run genuine counterfactual scenarios to establish model belief, as it is difficult to tell the difference between genuinely modifying the model beliefs, inducing the model to roleplay, and the target behaviour of incentivising the model to be deliberately misleading about its genuine beliefs.

Goal attribution for language models is hard.
 When discussing animals, as in
Section
˜
2.1 , we are fairly certain about their drives and motivations: the ‘four Fs’ (feeding, fleeing, fighting and mating) are reasonable guesses in most situations. This means that the intentional stance can be applied to infer their beliefs by observing their actions
10 10
10 In practice, there is often still considerable uncertainty about exactly how to explain animal beliefs, especially because it can be difficult to do repeatable experiments on animals, as well as uncertainty over their cognitive complexity.
. For language models there is much more uncertainty about what (if any?) drives we should attribute to them
11 11
11 An obvious candidate is ‘reduce training loss’ but this is a highly abstract goal that we wouldn’t necessarily expect to be psychological. For comparison; you could say that every animal’s goal is to maximise its inclusive genetic fitness, but this one isn’t one of the four F’s; it’s not something that we expect animals to
think about
 particularly.
. Indeed, what drives language models might have (if any) is an active (and contested) area of research. This means that we frequently have uncertainty over both the goals and beliefs of agents under study, making intentional attribution very underdetermined as we are missing two ‘legs’ of the triad.

Figure 6
:
Left: The intentional triad of beliefs, desires, and actions. Right: An intentional-stance cartoon where a dog’s beliefs about unattended food predict its behaviour.

Language models lack a distinction between action and utterance.
 Language models present the difficulty that they do not have a strong distinction between action and communication, at least for purely conversational settings. The most convincing evidence for deceptive intent is if someone is caught red-handed, taking actions which contradict their asserted beliefs. It is easy to catch language models asserting one thing and then something contradictory, but for a model which does not take actions, it is not obvious what evidence we should use to decide which of these should represent the true belief.

It is possible that the solution to this is to study more agentic models: for example, a coding model or software agent has more opportunities to take real actions which might contradict what it says. This might mean that the approach of studying text-only models in text-only environments, is mostly unsuitable for inducing ‘unambiguous’ deception, and might motivate work on more complex agent setups or models in reinforcement learning environments, as discussed in more detail in
Section
˜
3.4 .

Similar themes of the difficulty of intentional attribution are discussed in
Shanahan (2023)
 and
Dohnany et al. (2025)