Introduction While Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown exceptional performance in reasoning tasks (Wei et al. 2022 ) , their internal decision-making often remains a black box, making it hard for people to understand how the models reach their conclusions. In response to this challenge, mechanistic interpretability (MI) has emerged as a powerful alternative to traditional attributional methods (Chuang et al. 2024 ) and symbolic approaches (Xu et al. 2024 ; Li et al. 2024 ) . Instead of relying on external proxies, MI investigates how specific features, neurons, or internal circuits contribute to reasoning. However, truly ”looking inside” LLMs remains challenging: classic neuron-level analyses are limited by polysemanticity (Bricken et al. 2023 ) and superposition (Elhage et al. 2022 ) , while circuit-level mapping often requires intensive manual effort, posing significant challenges for scaling to modern architectures (Nanda et al. 2023 ) . A promising approach in this area is the use of sparse autoencoders (SAEs) (Cunningham et al. 2023 ) . By enforcing sparsity, SAEs help resolve polysemanticity and disentangle overlapping internal representations, producing monosemantic features that can be directly probed and causally manipulated. Furthermore, compared to component-level activation patching, which can be coarse-grained and ambiguous, feature-level interventions via SAEs provide potentially more targeted and semantically meaningful control over model behavior (Geiger et al. 2024 ; Marks et al. 2024 ) . Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting improves LLM performance on complex, multi-step reasoning tasks (Wei et al. 2022 ) . However, it remains unclear whether CoT reasoning is faithful: whether the intermediate reasoning steps faithfully reflect the model’s true internal decision-making process, or merely serve as plausible surface-level scaffolding. There is little feature-level, causally grounded analysis of reasoning faithfulness in LLMs, especially for math word problems requiring multi-step reasoning. To address the question whether CoT enhances faithfulness of reasoning, we combine SAE and activation patching, to analyze the semantic features underlying LLM reasoning. By (1) training separate SAEs on CoT and NoCoT activations to extract dictionary features, and (2) performing a causal intervention by patching activations to swap these features between reasoning conditions. To further investigate the semantic alignment of these internal features, we also perform a lightweight interpretation that maps selected features to natural language descriptions. We go beyond attributional and symbolic methods to gain deeper insight into CoT reasoning. (Code at: https://github.com/sekirodie1000/cot˙faithfulness ). We make the following contributions (Figure 1 ): • We introduce a feature-level causal intervention framework to mechanistically evaluate the faithfulness of CoT prompting in LLMs. • We propose a log-probability-based evaluation procedure, enabling the systematic assessment of feature-level causal impacts in multi-step mathematical reasoning. • We demonstrate on challenging math reasoning benchmarks that CoT induces sparser and more causally effective internal features, and thus indeed enhances faithful reasoning, but only in sufficiently large models. Figure 1: Workflow of the approach: After SAE, we do Activation patching, Feature Interpretation, and Activation Sparsity Analysis. All three confirm that CoT improves faithfulness of reasoning