Related Work We present related work on (1) CoT, (2) SAE and interpretation, (3) faithfulness and causal interpretability. Reasoning and CoT CoT prompting is effective at improving performance on complex tasks such as arithmetic and symbolic reasoning (Wei et al. 2022 ; Plaat et al. 2024 ) . Zero-shot CoT shows that phrases like ”Let’s think step by step” can elicit coherent reasoning (Kojima et al. 2022 ) . However, concerns remain: models sometimes reach correct answers despite incorrect intermediate steps (Yee et al. 2024 ) , raising doubts about the faithfulness of CoT chains. We choose GSM8K as a challenging benchmark for evaluating CoT reasoning (Cobbe et al. 2021 ) . GSM8K features complex problem structures, the answers often span multiple tokens, demanding high precision and logical coherence. If CoT truly reflects the model’s internal problem-solving process, then the relevant causal features should still be identifiable even in these more challenging scenarios. Sparse Autoencoder and Interpretation Recent work in MI uses SAEs to address superposition and polysemanticity in network representations (Cunningham et al. 2023 ) . Max activation set analysis (Bills et al. 2023 ) and probing classifiers (Belinkov 2022 ) are limited by either scale or range of labels they use. By learning an overcomplete set of latent directions with a sparsity constraint, SAEs can break down dense model activations into monosemantic and interpretable features (Bricken et al. 2023 ; Braun et al. 2024 ) . Crucially, SAE-derived features are not only interpretable but also causally manipulable. By intervening on these feature activations we can steer model behavior. Cunningham et al. (2023) used activation patching at the feature level and found that replacing or removing certain SAE features led to much larger changes in the model’s outputs than PCA. Similarly, Bricken et al. (2023) used logit attribution to measure feature importance and showed that individual learned features make discernible contributions to the model. With SAE, interventions at the feature level, targeting meaningful and sparse features, and give more precise control of model behavior than changes made at the neuron or layer level. Faithfulness and Causal Interpretability Faithfulness is defined as the degree to which an explanation reflects the model’s true decision-making process (Agarwal, Tanneru, and Lakkaraju 2024 ) . Several studies have proposed the use of counterfactual interventions to measure LLM faithfulness, such as CT/CCT frameworks (Atanasova et al. 2023 ; Siegel et al. 2024 ) and causal mediation analysis (Paul et al. 2024 ) . They emphasize the causal relationship between model explanations and reasoning. Matton et al. (2025) introduce interventions at the semantic concept level, elevating faithfulness analysis to a higher abstraction level. Causal analysis tools, such as activation patching (Meng et al. 2022 ) , test the impact of interventions on internal activations. Unlike correlational measures they give direct evidence of causal influence. Interchange interventions (Geiger et al. 2021 ) and ablation find responsible components in model circuits, and recent small-scale studies were able to fully reverse-engineere transformer layers, confirming circuit functions by patching and ablation (Nanda et al. 2023 ) . Current approaches for evaluating the causality of CoT reasoning remain limited. Some studies attempt to intervene in the model’s internal activation space to quantify the contribution of different parts of the reasoning chain to the final answer, making some progress in measuring faithfulness (Zhang and Nanda 2023 ; Yeo, Satapathy, and Cambria 2024 ) . However, because reasoning in LLMs is highly parallel and redundant, most current interventions operate at the layer or component level, which makes it challenging to pinpoint the specific features or causal mechanisms responsible for model outputs. Backup circuits (a self-repair mechanism) further complicate attribution (Dutta et al. 2024 ) . To address these challenges, recent work has introduced feature-level interventions: interpretable feature directions are first extracted (e.g., via SAEs), and then directly manipulated. Geiger et al. (2024) argue that using learned feature subspaces enables finer tracking and control of model reasoning. Marks et al. (2024) further construct sparse causal circuits at the feature level, showing that a small number of key features can reconstruct complex behaviors. Makelov, Lange, and Nanda (2023) note that interventions in the feature subspace can sometimes lead to interpretability illusions , where changes in model output not necessarily originate from the intended features. Wu et al. (2024) argue that this phenomenon reflects the inherent property of distributed representations in neural networks, and does not prevent patching or ablation methods from revealing effective structures in complex tasks. We further combine SAE feature space, activation patching, and CoT prompting to analyze the causal mechanisms in multi-step mathematical reasoning. By using methods such as Top-K patch curves, we provide a detailed characterization of the cumulative contribution of key features, advancing feature-level causal interpretation toward higher resolution and interpretability. Our work goes beyond prior external and attributional approaches by directly probing LLM internal representations with mechanistic interpretability. We combine SAE-based feature extraction and activation patching to causally test whether CoT-elicited features enhance faithfulness, filling a key gap left by existing methods.