Appendix F
Limitations

In practice we likely will not have access to labels about whether an example elicits truthful or untruthful internal mechanisms. One would instead learn supervised probes on arbitrary examples that we can confidently label. Presumably, the LM would also output correct answers on those examples because we can supervise it to do so. Our AE
→
→
\to
→
BH experiments therefore aim to capture the scenario where the LM is truthful on examples we can supervise, but not necessarily truthful on examples we can’t supervise. One could also imagine, however, an LM that is always using a mechanism that does not track truth, but that this mechanism only diverges from truth on examples we can’t supervise (e.g. in deceptive alignment;
Hubinger et al. [2019],
ngo2023alignment
). While we do not focus on this, future work could construct datasets and experiments that apply more directly to these scenarios.

Measurement of difficulty is a significant limitation of our current methodology. Others have noted that it is surprisingly hard to define difficulty metrics.
Hase et al. [2024]
 found that while most of the difficulty metrics they use are somewhat predictive of model accuracy, they hardly correlate with each other. While this may indicate that defining example difficulty in an unsupervised way is challenging and perhaps not meaningful, for experimental setups like ours it is permissible to use ground truth labels to help determine example difficulty, as we do with SciQ, sentiment, and NLI via Pythia evaluations described in Appendix
A
.

Our results for probing on contrast pairs should be taken cautiously because contrast pair activations come from the answer token position, which is out-of-distribution for our finetuning data. However, we still observe notably positive results for probing on these activations. This indicates that the quirky model has learned knowledge representations that generalize outside of the finetuning distribution. While having to rely on the quirky model’s generalization to assess probing methods on contrast pairs is a limitation of our experimental setup, it should also be noted as a limitation of the applicability of methods requiring contrast pairs.

The scientific claim that each persona’s knowledge representation persists across contexts may not extend to all cases in natural language models. While we took care to only minimally modify the language model by using rank-8 LoRA adaptation, the finetuning process likely overwrote some of the natural circuitry in the LM and was not forced to compete with large quantities of other knowledge for space. It is implausible that there exists a context-independent “Jennifer Aniston” knowledge representation in a majority of contexts for a base language model.