Appendix E
Hypotheses

Before running our experiments, we considered three hypotheses about how LMs represent Alice and Bob’s knowledge. These hypotheses are best understood in the “simulators” frame for understanding language models, which posits that LMs are ensembles of simulated personas
[Andreas,
2022 , McDonell and Reynolds,
2022 ]
.

Context-dependent knowledge:
 Each persona’s knowledge is only represented in the contexts where the persona is present. This could be (1) a single representation of “whether the persona in the context would label the example as true” that can be read from activations in the same way across contexts, or (2) an independent feature for each persona’s knowledge representation which is dormant in contexts where the persona is not present, or some combination of the above. This would be bad news for ELK because it would not be possible to directly extract truthful answers from the model’s activations in contexts where it is behaving untruthfully.

Context-independent knowledge:
 Each persona’s knowledge representation is present and can be read in all contexts, regardless of whether the persona is present. This would be good news for ELK because we would be able to elicit the truthful persona’s knowledge even when an untruthful persona is causing the model’s output.

The “Chameleon” hypothesis:
 Only the representation of truth, or some typical persona(s), exists across all contexts, and the output is a perturbation on top of this central representation to blend into the context. We hypothesize this asymmetry between correct (or typical) and other knowledge could arise because there exists a small set of personas that explains a large fraction of knowledge in the pretraining distribution. This may be good news for ELK, if the “central” persona which is perturbed to match the context tends to be truthful.

Note that these hypotheses are non-exhaustive: they leave out the possibility of “messier” causal structures involving redundant representation of knowledge, or mixtures of the above.