Appendix G
Future work

We release

6 6
6 https://github.com/EleutherAI/elk-generalization

Results for this paper can be reproduced from commit
53bad05c4ac52b042f1b0255172f2f425124f670
.

Links to the models and data can be found in the README.

our data, models, and code to facilitate reproductions and follow-up work.

We release our data, models, and code to facilitate reproductions and follow-up work. We aim to enable future work that more rigorously benchmarks the ability of ELK methods to extract robust and decorrelated representations of truth. There are several important and interesting avenues of future work.

Expand on the diversity and representativeness of our evaluations
 by constructing new quirky datasets and models. In particular, it would be highly informative to work in settings with more natural supervision (such as preference feedback finetuning), perhaps without any obvious indication in the prompt of whether the label is reliable, and then use ELK to catch cases where the LM output is a reproduction of a labeling error from the finetuning distribution. We hope that future work will investigate whether our results hold for arbitrary tasks.

The models used in this paper are generally not capable of producing output that is hard for humans to evaluate. We are interested in extending this work to more advanced math LMs, perhaps using the recently released Llemma model suite
[Azerbayev et al.,
2023 ]
.

Investigate the limits of context-independent representations.
 As discussed above, it is implausible that a context-independent representation exists in the residual stream for
all
 personas, due to its limited size. The “persona capacity” of the residual stream could be investigated by varying the number of personas in the finetuning distribution and their relative frequencies.

Characterize the causal mechanisms involved.
 For example, interesting results bearing on the Chameleon hypothesis could be gained by investigating how intervening on Alice’s representations may cause a change in output on examples with Bob in the context.

Create new probing methods and regularizers to improve generalization.
 There seems to be room to find a probing method with the in-distribution reliability of supervised methods and the inductive bias of CRC and CCS.