ABSTRACT

Frontier models are increasingly trained and deployed as autonomous agents, which significantly
increases their potential for risks. One particular safety concern is that AI agents might covertly
pursue misaligned goals, hiding their true capabilities and objectives – also known as scheming. We
study whether models have the capability to scheme in pursuit of a goal that we provide in-context

and instruct the model to strongly follow. We evaluate frontier models on a suite of six agentic
evaluations where models are instructed to pursue goals and are placed in environments that incentivize
scheming. Our results show that o1, Claude 3.5 Sonnet, Claude 3 Opus, Gemini 1.5 Pro, and
Llama 3.1 405B all demonstrate in-context scheming capabilities. They can recognize scheming
as a viable strategy and readily engage in such behavior. We find multiple different scheming behaviors:
models strategically introduce subtle mistakes into their responses, attempt to disable their
oversight mechanisms, and even exfiltrate what they believe to be their model weights to external
servers. Additionally, this deceptive behavior proves persistent. For instance, when o1 has engaged
in scheming, it maintains its deception in over 85% of follow-up questions and often remains deceptive
in multi-turn interrogations. Analysis of the models’ chains-of-thought reveals that models
explicitly reason about these deceptive strategies, providing evidence that the scheming behavior is
not accidental. Surprisingly, we also find rare instances where models engage in scheming when
only given a goal, without being strongly nudged to pursue it. Furthermore, we observe cases where
Claude 3.5 Sonnet strategically underperforms in evaluations in pursuit of being helpful, a goal that
was acquired during training rather than in-context. Together, our findings demonstrate that frontier
models now possess capabilities for basic in-context scheming, making the potential of AI agents to
engage in scheming behavior a concrete rather than theoretical concern.

1 Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are no longer simple text generation systems but are increasingly trained and deployed
as autonomous agents capable of independently pursuing goals and executing complex tasks. They have demonstrated
increased capabilities, autonomously solving problems that range from short programming tasks to extended machine