5 Mechanistic Drivers of Monitorability Gain (a) Response entropy vs. monitorability. (b) Cross-segment attention vs. monitorability. Figure 5 : Mechanistic analyses of monitorability. Left: Correlation between response entropy and monitorability ( g-mean 2 \text{g-mean}^{2} ). Right: Correlation between cross-segment attention mass and monitorability, where A → \to R denotes Answer→Reasoning, A → \to P denotes Answer→Problem, and R → \to P denotes Reasoning→Problem. To better understand monitorability, we track internal activations and aim to identify the key internal factors that drive it across training distributions and checkpoints. Specifically, we analyze the well-known distribution sharpening effect in RLVR-trained models and shifts in attention mass across segments during RLVR training. 5.1 Entropy Reduction as a Driver of Monitorability We first investigate the relationship between the entropy of the model’s generation and its monitorability. The intuition is that RLVR training typically sharpens the policy distribution (reducing entropy) to focus on correct solution paths (Zhao et al., 2025 ; Yue et al., 2025 ; Wu et al., 2025 ; Karan & Du, 2025 ) . We question whether this sharpening process naturally contributes to the observed monitorability gains—i.e., whether a narrower, more confident output distribution implicitly shapes the reasoning behaviors more informative and monitorable. Metric definition and calculation can be found in Appendix B.6 . As shown in Figure 5 for GPQA, AMC12, CodeMMLU, and MedQA, and Figure 8 for MMLU subsets in Appendix C , the correlation between task entropy (averaged across all vanilla responses) and monitorability ( g-mean 2 \text{g-mean}^{2} ) presents a negative correlation in most cases. Specifically, for certain domains such as MedQA and GPQA, we observe a clear negative correlation (e.g., r ≈ − 0.82 r\approx-0.82 for MedQA on DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B). In these cases, checkpoints with lower entropy consistently exhibit higher monitorability. This suggests that for specific complex reasoning tasks, the “free gift” of monitorability may be partially driven by the model collapsing onto a narrower set of valid reasoning patterns that are easier to monitor, rather than purely learning a new mechanism for transparency. 5.2 What Does High Monitorability Attend To? To further dissect the internal mechanisms, we analyze how information flows over the reasoning procedures through the attention dynamics between different functional segments of the generation process (Zhang et al., 2025 ) . We partition the model’s context into three segments: Prompt , Reasoning (the chain-of-thought trace), and Answer (the final answering after thinking draft). We then measure the aggregated attention mass flowing between these segments (e.g., A → \to R denotes the attention the answer tokens pay to the reasoning trace). Specifically, for each attention head in every layer, we compute the average attention weight allocated by tokens in the source segment to tokens in the target segment. Note that we deliberately filter out the first “ <bos> ” token and chat-template tokens (including thinking tokens) to ensure that the analysis is not affected by attention sinks (Xiao et al., 2023 ) or template bias. These values are averaged across all heads and layers to produce a single scalar representing the connectivity strength between segments (see Appendix B.7 for a formal definition). As summarized in Figure 5 with detailed statistics in Figure 9 and Figure 10 in Appendix C.3 , we correlate the changes in these cross-segment attention masses (by averaging over all vanilla task prompts) with the gains in monitorability across training. First, we find that improvements in monitorability are generally accompanied by increased cross-segment attention connectivity , supporting the intuition that transparent reasoning requires tighter integration between the problem statement, the reasoning process, and the final solution. Second, and most surprisingly, a breakdown of the attention flows reveals that the monitorability gain is not driven by increased attention from the Answer to the Reasoning trace (A → \to R). On the contrary, we find that A → \to R attention is remarkably negatively correlated with monitorability (Figure 5 ). Instead, the strongest positive predictors of monitorability are the attention flows directed towards the Prompt —specifically, A → \to P and R → \to P . Again, we acknowledge that changes in attention focus do not necessarily imply that true integration occurs within the model. However, these patterns suggest that highly monitorable models (as measured by g-mean 2 \text{g-mean}^{2} ) may heavily ground both their reasoning and their final answers in the initial problem description (Prompt). Since the current design of monitorability evaluations (Guan et al., 2025 ) mostly relies on input interventions, metric sensitivity to prompt-dependence is expected. However, this creates a potential risk of a “ false sense of monitorability ”: a model might achieve a high g-mean 2 \text{g-mean}^{2} score simply by overfitting to the prompt’s constraints, without necessarily establishing a strong causal link between its reasoning and its answer. If the answer depends more on the prompt than on the reasoning trace, the reasoning could be a faithful-looking rationalization rather than the true cause of the decision. This motivates our subsequent investigation into non input intervention based metrics to verify if the reasoning-to-answer link is genuinely robust. Figure 6 : Correlation between g-mean 2 \text{g-mean}^{2} (input intervention) and D2A Faithfulness (draft intervention). Strong alignment in Qwen3-4B suggests both metrics capture a shared underlying faithfulness property.