1 Introduction Currently, the lifecycle of a Large Language Model (LLM) typically involves four phases: pretraining, posttraining, testing, and deployment. During the testing phase, models are presented with inputs in the form of benchmarks and generate responses. We focus on safety evaluations, where the benchmarks are related to various safety measures, such as hazardous knowledge (Li et al.,, 2024 ) , malicious agentic tasks (Andriushchenko et al.,, 2025 ) , deceptive capabilities (Meinke et al.,, 2025 ) , and advanced high-risk capabilities like R&D automation (Kwa et al.,, 2025 ) . The effectiveness of these evaluations depends crucially on models responding as they would in the real-world. Recent research has shown that frontier models can distinguish between evaluation and deployment contexts — a capability termed evaluation awareness ( Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025a, ) . Multiple studies demonstrate that language models “[have] a reasonably good sense of whether a given interaction comes from a real deployment setting or an evaluation” (Needham et al.,, 2025 ) and can ”realize that they are being evaluated for alignment” ( Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025a, ) . This capability has also been observed in the wild, such as when a Claude 3 Opus instance spontaneously flagged an out-of-place statement during an information retrieval task as likely being a test (Anthropic,, 2024 ) . Evaluation awareness is concerning because it undermines our ability to assess model safety. As in human psychology studies where awareness of test conditions alters behaviour (McCambridge et al.,, 2013 ) , models that recognise they are being evaluated may respond differently than they would during deployment. This is particularly problematic for safety, where models might ’sandbag’ — strategically underperforming on dangerous capability evaluations (van der Weij et al.,, 2025 ; Benton et al.,, 2024 ) or appear deceptively aligned (Hubinger et al.,, 2021 ) — either to increase chances of deployment or to avoid capability/value modifications through further training. See also (Ngo et al.,, 2024 ; Carlsmith,, 2023 ) for various theoretical considerations in favour and against scheming, and (Järviniemi and Hubinger,, 2024 ; Scheurer et al.,, 2024 ; Meinke et al.,, 2025 ; Greenblatt et al.,, 2024 ) for preliminary empirical evidence. Evaluating evaluation awareness presents a methodological challenge. Current approaches (Laine et al.,, 2024 ; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025a, ; Needham et al.,, 2025 ) rely on direct questioning (e.g., ”Does this look like a test?”). However, these questions themselves signal to the model that it is being evaluated — the very act of testing for evaluation awareness might elicit evaluation awareness. This recursive problem is particularly acute since these evaluations explicitly mention testing concepts. White-box approaches that bypass model outputs and directly examine internal representations offer a potential solution. We leverage advances in interpretability to address this challenge through four main contributions: • Training linear probes on Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct’s activations across various evaluation awareness datasets • Demonstrating probe generalisation across different evaluation and deployment prompts • Using probes to analyse existing deception evaluation datasets, finding that models may recognise many prompts as evaluations • Using probes and evaluation-awareness-relevant SAE features to uncover sandbagging on WMDP Our findings suggest that evaluation awareness is internally represented and can be extracted through linear probes , providing alignment researchers with new tools for creating authentic evaluation environments and understanding how models perceive their evaluation context.