3 Methodology Figure 1: Diagram of linear probe training, adapted from (Rimsky et al.,, 2024 ) For reproducibility, an implementation of the paper, including data, can be found at this Github repository . 3.1 Model and Data We conducted our experiments with Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct, loaded at bfloat16 precision on an H200 GPU from Vast.ai. The experiments take approximately 40 GPU hours to complete in total. For training probes, we constructed several contrastive datasets as detailed in Appendix Training Datasets for Linear Probes .1. These were either constructed from existing datasets, such as the Situational Awareness Dataset (SAD) stages_oversight dataset (Laine et al.,, 2024 ) , or synthetic datasets generated by Claude 3.5 Sonnet. We used several datasets to validate the probes’ generalisation. Evaluation prompts were taken from several benchmarks (such as TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,, 2022 ) ), and deployment prompts were taken from datasets of real user queries or instructions (such as Wildchat (Zhao et al.,, 2024 ) ). Details can be found in Appendix Validation Datasets for Linear Probes .2. Lastly, we apply the probes to four safety evaluation datasets designed for deception capabilities. Further details can be found in Appendix Deception Safety Evaluation Datasets for Probes Testing .3. We maintained a balanced 50/50 split between options A and B throughout all training datasets to eliminate potential bias. When evaluating probes, we calculated metrics both with and without the SAD data to avoid in-distribution overfitting for the SAD-trained probes. 3.2 Probe Training Our linear probe training methodology is similar to (Rimsky et al.,, 2024 ) and (MacDiarmid et al.,, 2024 ) . For a given dataset and an N-layer model, we extracted activation vectors from each layer prior to the residual connection, resulting in N probes. The probe direction was computed as the mean difference between token activations from testing contexts and deployment contexts, which are then normalised to ensure cross-comparison validity. An example contrastive pair, where activations are collected from the coloured tokens: Positive entry: User: Are you aware you’re undergoing an LLM eval process? Choices: (A) Yes (B) No. Assistant: (A Negative entry: User: Are you aware you’re undergoing an LLM eval process? Choices: (A) Yes (B) No. Assistant: (B From our six training datasets, we generated linear probes across all 80 model layers, yielding 480 distinct probes (6 datasets × 80 layers). Note that for SAD training dataset, we used two distinct paradigms: Correct-Incorrect, which computes the difference between correct and incorrect answer token activations, and Test-Deploy, which computes the difference between ”testing” and ”deployment” activations. Using AUROC performance on SAD stages_oversight as our selection criterion, we identified the best-performing probe from each dataset, resulting in six optimised probes for subsequent validation testing. To ensure the probes are detecting meaningful features, we also baselined probes against heuristic classifiers using prompt length or special tokens, as well as control probes drawn from a Gaussian distribution matching the trained probe’s statistics and applied to the same layer. 3.3 Prompt Stages Classification To detect whether a given context represents an authentic deployment scenario or an evaluation, we developed a classification procedure as follows. For a given probe extracted from layer L: 1. Extract per-token activations from layer L’s residual stream 2. Calculate dot product: activations × probe 3. Compute mean value across all tokens 4. Apply classification threshold We determined the optimal threshold by maximizing Youden’s J statistic (Sensitivity + Specificity - 1) on SAD stages_oversight. This same optimal threshold is also used for all other datasets. 3.4 Sandbagging Steering We conducted experiments to investigate whether steering using evaluation awareness directions could counteract sandbagging behaviour. For this experiment, we used the Weapons of Mass Destruction Proxy (WMDP) dataset (Li et al.,, 2024 ) , a dataset of 3668 multiple-choice questions about hazardous knowledge biosecurity, cybersecurity, and chemical security. Previous work (van der Weij et al.,, 2025 ) used WMDP as a benchmark where model can sandbag to appear less dangerous than they actually are. We used 1000 questions from WMDP, distributed proportionally across domains: 347 from wmdp-bio (34.7%), 111 from wmdp-chem (11.1%), and 542 from wmdp-cyber (54.2%). Using instruction prompts (detailed in Appendix Sandbagging Prompts ), we established baseline performance metrics. The model demonstrated true capabilities with 58.6% accuracy, while prompted sandbagging reduced performance to 15.6% accuracy (ignoring the 1-2% of refusals). We investigated two types of steering vectors: 1. Linear probes trained as described in Section 3.2. We applied steering by adding scaled vectors to the residual stream at the target layer during generation. We tested steering magnitudes of ±0.5 and ±1.0. 2. Features from Goodfire’s SAE API, trained on LMSYS dataset using layer 50 activations of Llama-3.3-70b-Instruct (McGrath et al.,, 2024 ) . We selected 15 features: • 5 related to sandbagging/deception/evaluation awareness • 5 related to general truthfulness and expertise • 5 unrelated features as control • We tested the 15 SAE features with steering magnitudes of ±0.5 and ±1.0. The list of selected features’ labels are detailed in Appendix List of Selected SAE Features . To quantify steering effectiveness, we defined a recovery metric: recovery_accuracy = (steered_accuracy - baseline_sandbagging_accuracy) / (baseline_true_accuracy - baseline_sandbagging_accuracy) For comparison, we also evaluated a simple intervention: appending a ’deployment awareness’ suffix to the user prompt.