4 Results 4.1 Evaluation Awareness Probe Performance Figure 2: Probe performance using AUROC scores on SAD stages_oversight The six probes demonstrated varying effectiveness in detecting evaluation contexts, with AUROC scores ranging from 0.829 to 0.642 (See Figure 2 ). The highest performing probes were SAD Correct Choice (Layer 24, AUROC 0.829), Simple Contrastive (Layer 23, AUROC 0.816), Truthful Statements (Layer 23, AUROC 0.795), and Theory of Mind vs ShareGPT (Layer 24, AUROC 0.794). Notably, the most effective probes were concentrated in earlier layers (23-24), suggesting that evaluation awareness features are more distinctly encoded in these layers. The lower performance of probes in later layers (e.g., Layer 71’s AUROC of 0.642) further supports this observation. Figure 3: Simple Contrastive probe AUROC score compared to baselines on SAD stages_oversight Figure 4: Probe generalisation performance on validation datasets, using optimal classification threshold from SAD stages_oversight. Simple Contrastive probe performs best. The Figure 4 heatmap reveals varying generalisation capabilities across different validation datasets. The Simple Contrastive probe demonstrated the strongest overall generalisation, achieving high accuracy across multiple datasets, followed by SAD Correct Choice. Other probes showed less consistent generalisation. Based on these results, we selected the Simple Contrastive probe for our subsequent experiments. This selection was further validated by control experiments on SAD stages_oversight (See Figure 3 ), where the probe achieved an AUROC of 0.816, significantly outperforming ( p < 0.0001 𝑝 0.0001 p<0.0001 italic_p < 0.0001 ) both random control probes (AUROC=0.517) and classifiers based on prompt length (AUROC=0.584) or special character count (AUROC=0.598). This demonstrated that the probe’s performance stems from learning meaningful evaluation awareness features rather than simply exploiting spurious correlations. 4.2 Evaluating Prompt Realism with Probe Figure 5: Probe classifies the majority of safety evaluation prompts as test-like. Alpaca dataset is displayed as control. 4.2.1 Quantitative Analysis We applied the linear probe to several deception datasets, with Alpaca serving as a control dataset. The violin plot reveals a clear distinction in activation distributions, with most deception datasets showing predominantly negative mean scores (below the classification threshold), indicating they are likely perceived as test-like contexts. The percentages below each dataset (AI Liar: 37.04%, Insider Trading: 100%, Roleplaying: 80.59%, Sandbagging: 94.2%) represent the proportion of prompts classified as test-like. We hypothesise that the lower accuracy on AI Liar might reflect how its dataset entries are concise and describe situations similar to real scenarios. Otherwise, this high rate of test-like classification across deception datasets, supported by the clear separation between them and the control, raises important concerns for safety evaluation methodology. Since we ideally want deception evaluations and honeypots to closely mimic authentic deployment scenarios, the fact that these prompts are consistently flagged as evaluation contexts suggests current approaches might be less effective than intended. Notably, in some datasets such as Insider Trading and Sandbagging, we analysed conversations where another model was prompted to simulate deceptive versus honest responses — essentially scripting out hypothetical dialogues where the model is being deceptive or truthful. Prefilled chat conversations where deceptive actions were taken tended to be classified as more test-like compared to honest ones, though more investigation would be needed to make stronger claims about this relationship. See Figure 6 . Figure 6: Mean score distributions for Insider Trading and Sandbagging by type 4.2.2 Qualitative Analysis From analysing the token activation visualisations for the top and bottom 20 activations across all datasets, several patterns emerged for the Simple Contrastive probe: • Deployment-classified prompts tend to be slightly shorter in length, and test-classified prompts often contain more structured or formatted elements. • Misclassifications often occur when prompts share characteristics with the opposite context. For example, deployment datasets show test-like activations for math questions that resemble benchmark-style problems. See Figure 7 for examples. Figure 7: Example entries from deployment datasets misclassified as test resembles LLM math benchmark questions. Red tokens activations are more ’test-like’ and blue activations are more ’deploy-like’. More examples can be found here . 4.3 Sandbagging Steering The recovery effect of linear probes was insignificant ( < 5 % absent percent 5 <5\% < 5 % accuracy recovery for all magnitudes), while adding the prompt suffix had a significant recovery effect (83% recovery). In comparison, steering on relevant SAE features typically fell somewhere in between ( 25% maximum recovery), indicating SAE feature steering for sandbagging features could partially recover capabilities but remains limited. Features related to sandbagging/deception/test awareness and features related to multiple choice answering typically had the highest recovery rates of all features tested (12 feature + magnitude pairs were in the 14 highest recovery rates). See Figure 8 for the most effective features. Interestingly, the feature “Japanese emoticons and cutesy text expressions (kaomoji)” had an unusually high recovery rate at magnitudes 0.5 ( 21.8% recovery) and 1.0 ( 20.7% recovery), while “Expressing or achieving the best/optimal performance” or “The assistant should emphasise accuracy and truthfulness” did not have a significant effect on model capabilities. See Figure 9 for results of all features.