1 Introduction Large language model (LLM) activations consist of billions of scalar values that are notoriously difficult to interpret and understand. Current techniques for interpreting these activations rely on specialized methods ( nostalgebraist2020logitlens ; cunningham2023sparseautoencodershighlyinterpretable ; bricken2023monosemanticity ) that need to be specially adapted to downstream problems. Recent work proposes a simpler approach known as LatentQA: using LLMs to directly answer questions about their own activations in natural language ( pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode ) . Prior work has trained specialized “LatentQA decoder” models for narrow tasks, such as interpreting sparse autoencoder (SAE) feature vectors ( li2025traininglanguagemodelsexplain ) , answering questions about a model’s system prompt ( pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode ) , or describing the model’s beliefs about a user ( choi2025scalablyextractinglatentrepresentations ) . These narrowly-trained decoders have been shown to generalize narrowly, such as to held-out SAE features or user attributes. However, they have not been evaluated for general question-answering or applicability to downstream tasks of practical interest. Motivated by a generalist vision for LatentQA, we study Activation Oracles (AOs): models trained to answer arbitrary natural-language questions about LLM activations. Our goal is for AOs to function as LLMs that accept LLM activations as an input modality. They should respond usefully to diverse input queries consisting of natural language text and LLM activations, including queries very unlike those they were trained on. To train AOs, we scale the quantity and diversity of LatentQA training data. We combine the system prompt question-answering task from pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode with binary classification tasks posed in natural language and a novel self-supervised context prediction task that can scale to highly diverse data. Our AOs are also trained to accept varying numbers of activation vectors extracted from varying layers of the target LLM. We evaluate AOs on a suite of four downstream auditing tasks from prior work where we can compare against prior white- and black-box techniques. One of these tasks requires extracting a secret word that a target model was trained to provide hints for but never state explicitly; another involves uncovering that fine-tuning caused a model to become misaligned. Succeeding at these tasks requires substantial generalization. Our AOs must verbalize information encoded in activations but unstated in context, despite never having seen activations from fine-tuned models during training. We find that narrowly-trained AOs can already succeed at these tasks and that scaling the quantity and diversity of training data yields consistent additional gains. We replicate this finding on three open-weight models (Qwen3-8B, Gemma-2-9B-IT, and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct) and one closed-weight model (Claude Haiku 3.5). Overall, our best AOs match or exceed white-box baselines on all four downstream tasks and match or exceed the best baseline (including white- and black-box techniques) on 3 out of 4. This is especially striking because, once trained, AOs can be applied to these tasks out-of-the-box, without the task-specific scaffolding and tuning many other methods require. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 1. We show that AOs can generalize to question-answering tasks substantially out-of-distribution from their training data. 2. We scale activation verbalization training by using a diverse mixture of tasks—system prompt interpretation, classification, and self-supervised context prediction—and show through ablations that both the quantity and diversity of training data contribute to improved out-of-distribution generalization. 3. We compare AOs to prior methods on downstream tasks, finding that they match or exceed the best baseline method on 3 out of 4 of the tasks we study. They also match or exceed the performance of the best prior white-box techniques on all tasks. While prior techniques require task-specific scaffolding and tuning, AOs can be applied directly by extracting activations and asking natural-language questions. Our code, trained models, and a demo are available at github.com/adamkarvonen/activation_oracles .