2 Background Our work directly builds on pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode , which introduces both (1) LatentQA, the task of open-ended question-answering about LLM activations and (2) a method, Latent Interpretation Tuning, for training an LLM to perform LatentQA via fine-tuning on supervised data. However, prior work on LatentQA has been limited in two related ways: 1. Narrowness. Prior work studies LatentQA in narrow settings only, such as training models to interpret SAE features ( li2025traininglanguagemodelsexplain ) or describe the model’s beliefs about a user ( choi2025scalablyextractinglatentrepresentations ) . The generalist vision of LatentQA, focused on arbitrary question-answering, has not been systematically pursued. 2. Evaluation. Narrowly-trained LatentQA decoders have been evaluated in narrow ways, such as generalization to held-out SAE features or user attributes. However, their generalization to tasks very different from their training has not been studied. This especially holds for downstream, practically-relevant tasks where the performance of LatentQA decoders can be compared to alternative baseline methods. This paper addresses both of these limitations. First, we scale the diversity of Latent Interpretation Tuning to train Activation Oracles , that is, LLMs developed for generalist LatentQA. Then we evaluate whether AOs succeed at this goal by evaluating them on downstream tasks very different from their training data. Notably, these downstream tasks permit comparison to other methods, allowing us to put the performance of AOs in context. Throughout the paper, we compare our diversely-trained AOs to (1) PatchScopes ( ghandeharioun2024patchscopesunifyingframeworkinspecting ) , that is, untrained AOs with the same weights as the original model; (2) narrowly-trained AOs, trained on the same data used in pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode ; and (3) where applicable, other baseline techniques. Figure 2: Training and evaluation tasks for Activation Oracles. Left: Training tasks include binary classification, context prediction (previous/next tokens), and system prompt question-answering. Right: Out-of-distribution evaluation tasks test generalization to qualitatively different settings, such as recovering secret words from models trained to hide them, detecting behavioral changes from fine-tuning, and extracting biographical facts fine-tuned into a model. In all cases, activations from a source context (blue) are injected into placeholder tokens ( <ACT> ) alongside a natural language query (yellow). Importantly, the evaluation tasks require extracting information absent from the input text, which is out-of-distribution from training.