6 Training Dataset Ablations In this section, we study how training data affects Activation Oracle performance. We first scale up the number of training datasets, which simultaneously increases both the diversity and quantity of examples. We then run a controlled ablation that partially disentangles these two factors by holding total sample count fixed while varying dataset diversity. 6.1 Scaling the Training Mixture We compare four training configurations: (1) the untrained base model, (2) models trained only on system prompt interpretation ( SPQA only ), (3) models trained on both SPQA and our binary classification tasks ( SPQA + Classification ), and (4) our full Activation Oracle trained on SPQA, classification, and context prediction ( Full Dataset ). Result: Scaling the training mixture consistently improves performance. . Figure 5 shows performance for twelve model / evaluation combinations across these four configurations. Ten out of twelve combinations achieve their best performance with the full training mixture, and almost all curves trend upward as we add more datasets. In the remaining two cases, the full mixture is within error of the best-performing configuration. This pattern holds across both out-of-distribution generalization tasks (e.g., PersonaQA and held-out classification datasets) and the secret-keeping tasks, suggesting that simply adding more diverse activation-verbalization tasks is a robust way to improve Activation Oracles. The model trained on the SPQA-only dataset is already competitive with existing white-box baselines on the secret-keeping evaluations. As shown in Figure 3 , it is within the standard error of the best white-box methods on all three evaluations. However, SPQA-only models exhibit greater sensitivity to hyperparameters. As shown in Figure 8 , while the best SPQA-only learning rate achieves 91% on User Gender, the second-best achieves only 65%. We also note that while we use the SPQA dataset from pan2024latentqateachingllmsdecode , our methodology differs. As shown in Figure 9 , switching from layer 0 (used in Pan et al.) to layer 1 increases performance by 11% on the SSC evaluation. The full training dataset provides consistent gains that leads to outperformance on all three secret-keeping evaluations. In contrast, on Qwen3-8B evaluations such as PersonaQA and Taboo (Figure 19 ), scaling the training mixture yields much larger improvements, indicating that the value of added diversity is model and task dependent. 6.2 Separating Diversity from Data Quantity Adding datasets increases both the number of examples and the diversity of training signals. To tease apart these effects, we run a controlled ablation on Qwen3-8B that focuses on the impact of adding our self-supervised context prediction task (Figure 7 ). We compare three settings: • A SPQA + Classification baseline trained on 400k examples drawn from SPQA and our binary classification tasks. • A truncated full mixture that uses all three datasets (SPQA, classification, and context prediction) but is subsampled to the same total of 400k examples. • The full mixture with all datasets and the full 1M examples. Result: Both diversity and quantity of training data improve performance. Although the SPQA + Classification baseline and the truncated full mixture use the same total number of training examples, the truncated full mixture allocates 60% of its budget to the self-supervised context prediction task. This both increases the diversity of activation-verbalization signals and reduces the fraction of supervised question–answer style data. Despite this reduction in supervised training, the truncated full mixture improves over the SPQA + Classification baseline on most evaluation metrics, indicating that adding diverse context prediction examples helps the verbalizer generalize. At the same time, the full 1M-example mixture outperforms the truncated mixture, showing that increasing the total amount of data also yields gains. Together, these results suggest that both diversity and quantity of activation-verbalization tasks contribute meaningfully to Activation Oracle performance. Figure 7: Both data diversity and data quantity improve Activation Oracle performance. We ablate training on Qwen3-8B across three configurations: a SPQA + Classification baseline with 400k examples, a truncated full mixture that includes SPQA, classification, and context prediction but is subsampled to 400k examples, and the full mixture with all three datasets and 1M examples. The truncated mixture outperforms the data-matched baseline on most evaluation metrics, showing that adding the self-supervised context prediction task improves generalization even when total sample count is fixed. The full 1M-example mixture performs best overall, indicating that scaling both the diversity and the quantity of activation-verbalization data provide the strongest gains.