Appendix F
Monitoring Latents: Activations vs. Chains-of-Thought

Both chains-of-thought and activations can be viewed as latent variables within an agent’s computation of its final output. In outcome-based reinforcement learning, both are not directly pressured by learning objectives to adhere to specific formats, be safe for users to read, or meet any criteria beyond helping the agent reach a highly rewarded final output. As a result, these latent variables can contain information that outputs will not, such as incorrect answers that are considered and then omitted, information that could allow misuse, and, as demonstrated in this paper, the model’s intent to reward hack
[62]
.

Chains-of-thought (CoT) and activations each offer distinct advantages when used for monitoring. One key difference lies in the learned feature basis. Chains-of-thought are expressed in human language, providing a consistent basis across different models. For example, the word “elephant” almost certainly conveys a similar meaning across a wide range of large language models, even when those models differ in size, architecture, or training data. In contrast, activations operate in high-dimensional feature spaces that vary across training runs due to factors like random initialization, model architecture, and training dynamics. As a result, the concept of “elephant” may be represented by entirely different vectors or circuits in different models, even if those models’ outputs behave similarly. The consistency of chain-of-thought representations significantly simplifies the creation of monitors, as it enables zero-shot prompting of one model to oversee the CoT of another.

However, chains-of-thought are only a low-dimensional component of a model’s full computation. While we have shown they provide valuable insight into certain aspects of the reasoning process, it is also possible that they omit critical information. Activations, on the other hand technically encompass all the information involved in the model’s reasoning. However, due to their high dimensionality and nonlinear features, interpreting activations productively can be difficult. As a result, in practice analysis often focuses on activations from specific layers and tokens. This selective approach may lead to the activations considered not containing all relevant information, much like chains-of-thought.

While we have found that CoT monitors can detect complex hacks that require deliberate reasoning in the chain-of-thought, they have been less effective at finding simpler hacks that exploit superficial patterns, special formatting, or specific trigger phrases learned to fool a reward model. Although these simpler hacks are generally less consequential than issues like executing incorrect code, it remains unclear whether all impactful hacks will manifest within the chain-of-thought. This uncertainty underscores the importance of continued investment in other mitigations, such as activation-based monitoring, that could capture forms of reward hacking that CoT monitoring alone could miss.