6 Conclusion

Our findings demonstrate that chain-of-thought monitoring can be very effective in detecting certain classes of misaligned behaviors in reasoning models. This emergent monitorability offers a promising avenue for improving model safety, as CoTs often reveal insights into an agent’s intent and reasoning processes that are not readily apparent from its actions and outputs alone. However, we also observed that applying optimization pressure directly to CoTs can undermine their monitorability. While moderate CoT optimization can enhance capabilities—particularly in the low-optimization regime—excessive optimization encourages models to obscure their true intent, effectively decoupling their reasoning from their actions and degrading the CoT’s utility for monitoring.

Some motivations for using CoT pressures may be satisfied via other means. For instance, instead of pressuring chains-of-thought to be harmless and directly showing them to users, users could be shown a summarized or paraphrased version generated by a separate model.
This would allow the CoT to remain unrestricted and still give users realtime insight into the agent’s reasoning.
Only surfacing summarized CoTs likely also reduces the risk a model can be easily distilled; however, for the purposes of this work, we are primarily concerned with obfuscation risks. If CoT pressures are used to improve agent capabilities or alignment, there may be no alternative approach to yield the same improvements without degrading monitorability. In the worst case, where the agent learns to fully obscure its intent in its CoT, we ultimately revert to the same model safety conditions that existed prior to the emergence of reasoning models and must rely on monitoring activations, monitoring potentially adversarial CoTs and outputs, or improved alignment methods.

Model actions and outputs continue to grow in complexity, and we’ve demonstrated that even at their current capabilities, models can execute sophisticated reward hacks. In the near future, these models may become either too advanced or too widely used for humans to manually oversee. For this reason, we believe that CoT monitoring may become one of few tools we have for identifying latent misalignments, and it may be required that we avoid strong chain-of-thought optimization pressures entirely to guarantee we do not inadvertently cause CoT obfuscation.