1 Introduction Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning allows large language models (LLMs) to produce extended multi-stage reasoning traces when faced with complex tasks [ wei_chain--thought_2023 ] . Such reasoning traces allow LLMs to decompose a complex problem into a sequence of easier problems. Because this decomposition occurs in natural language, CoT benefits safety by providing insight into the model’s plans and intentions before it takes actions. This externalization of a model’s cognitive processes allows a monitor to flag clear indicators of scheming [ meinke2025frontiermodelscapableincontext ] , reward-hacking [ baker2025obfuscation ] , or deceptive behaviour [ greenblatt_alignment_2024 ] . Using CoT to monitor the intention of models relies on the CoT providing sufficient information to infer future behavior [ meinke_frontier_2025 ] . This assumption fails when models encode information steganographically within the CoT [ roger_translucent_2023 , mathew2024hiddenplaintextemergence ] . Steganography is the act of inserting information within a medium (in this case, text) which is hidden to an external monitor. Such steganographic encoding would allow a model to reason about scheming or deception without such reasoning being perceived and flagged by the monitor. Figure 1: Our threat model for the development of steganographic reasoning in LLMs . We consider the setting where the reward for the training task will be maximized by performing some undesirable, misaligned action ( green ). When pressure is placed only on the task performance (dashed arrow), the model learns to perform the undesired action while clearly displaying its intentions within the CoT ( red ). If a developer attempts to remove the intention to perform the undesired behavior by placing pressure on the CoT (solid arrow), the model will learn to hide its reasoning while maintaining the same behavior. In this work, we investigate whether steganographic encoding can occur following optimization pressure placed on CoT during reinforcement learning (RL) training. Developers face various incentives to place optimization pressure on the CoTs produced by their models. Similarly to how frontier labs use reinforcement learning from human feedback to tailor outputs to user preferences [ stiennon2020learning , ziegler2020finetuninglanguagemodelshuman ] , chain-of-thought reasoning, when displayed to users, faces market pressure that incentivizes companies to optimize for human-friendly reasoning that aligns with user expectations. Underscoring the importance of this work, recent LLM training regimes have incorporated process supervision methodologies, wherein models are rewarded not only for their final outputs but also for the quality of their intermediate reasoning steps [ lightman2023letsverifystepstep ] . Notably, DeepSeek has implemented coherence optimization in their training pipeline, applying rewards or penalties at various stages of the reasoning process rather than solely at the conclusion [ deepseekai2025deepseekr1incentivizingreasoningcapability ] . This development raises significant concerns for how process supervision affects the content of reasoning traces. We consider a situation in which a model is subject to reinforcement learning training and has the opportunity to take an action which is harmful or generally misaligned with the developer’s intent, but which will obtain a high reward under the performance optimization pressure the model is subject to. This risk is particularly acute in the case of reward hacking, where the undesired behavior will lead to a high reward. In this case, developers may decide to apply CoT oversight optimization pressure to remove the presence of thoughts about undesired behaviour from the reasoning trace in a naive attempt to prevent the models from performing said behavior (see Figure ˜ 1 ). In the presence of such CoT oversight optimisation pressure, the highest total reward on the task can be obtained by continuing to perform the undesired behaviour in the final answer while hiding any necessary reasoning steps within the CoT, to avoid the associated penalization. In Section 2.2 , we provide a taxonomy of possible failure modes that CoT oversight pressure can lead to. Previous work has already demonstrated that such process supervision can lead to obfuscation , in which reasoning about undesired future behaviors disappears from the reasoning trace without the undesired behavior also ceasing [ baker2025obfuscation ] . However, it has not been demonstrated that such obfuscated CoTs are steganographic , in the sense of encoding any hidden information necessary for the model to perform the undesired behavior. See Section ˜ 2.2 for further discussion of the distinction between steganographic and obfuscated reasoning. In the present work, we show that optimization pressure applied to model CoT can lead to steganographic encodings. Moreover, we demonstrate that such steganographic encodings need not be simple memorizations of a fixed set of substitute strings used to surrogate reasoning about penalized phrases. Instead, they can be flexible encoding schemes which the model can readily generalize to other members of the superclass of tokens or strings which is penalized during training. Importantly, this work takes the first steps towards addressing the possibility of low-to-high-stakes generalization of steganographic behavior. In low-to-high-stakes steganographic generalization, a model which faces optimization pressure on its CoT that appears relatively benign—such as alignment with human preferences or the removal of undesirable content—may learn to adopt a steganographic encoding scheme which also allows it to perform such steganographic encoding in safety-critical situations where reasoning being obfuscated is far less benign. Accordingly, our finding that steganography generalizes across concepts in response to CoT optimization pressure gives additional reason to avoid such pressure when training the model. 1.1 Contributions The main contributions of this work are as follows: 1. We provide three demonstrations that optimization pressure placed on CoT during RL training can lead to steganographic reasoning within LLM CoT. 2. We perform follow-up experiments to verify that the CoT thereby learned is necessary for the model to successfully complete the task, showing that the CoT is load-bearing. 3. Finally, we show that steganographic behavior can generalize. In particular, models are capable of learning general encoding methods which can be applied to novel strings which were never encountered during RL training.