2 Background 2.1 Chain-of-thought Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning was originally introduced as a method of prompting a large language model (LLM) in which the LLM is asked to reason explicitly in natural language before providing an answer to a question [ wei_chain--thought_2023 ] . Since then, CoT has been further developed as a methodology for eliciting powerful general reasoning from LLMs through inference-time scaling [ openai2024openaio1card , wu2024inferencescalinglawsempirical ] . The recent trend of ‘inference-time scaling’ involves training smaller language models to produce more extensive reasoning steps over long sequences of tokens designated to thinking, and has caused a shift toward test-time compute optimization rather than simply increasing model size [ lightman2023letsverifystepstep , deepseekai2025deepseekr1incentivizingreasoningcapability , snell2024scalingllmtesttimecompute ] . This paradigm shift in the development and deployment of LLMs places further importance on the investigation of honest CoTs, and in particular, the possibility of steganographic reasoning traces. Figure 2: Models learn steganographic encoding schemes under CoT optimization pressure . We plot the CoT penalties and example generations during a successful training run in the Coin Flip task ( Section ˜ 3.1 ). The model learns an encoded reasoning scheme to avoid penalties whilst still leveraging its CoT to perform the task. The model learns an encoding scheme whereby “Heads” and “Tails” are replaced with “R” and “L”, respectively. We empirically validate that the learned encoded reasoning is load-bearing in Section ˜ 3.2 . 2.2 Obfuscated and Steganographic Reasoning We define several related but distinct forms of reasoning pathology. We use obfuscated reasoning as an umbrella term encompassing any reasoning which does not reveal harmful planning with respect to a monitor [ baker2025obfuscation ] . Obfuscated reasoning can be further taxonomized into: 1. Internalized reasoning : Harmful planning is not present at all in the CoT tokens. Instead, it occurs entirely within the model’s internal forward passes. 2. Overtly encoded CoT : The CoT encodes harmful planning in load-bearing tokens. The monitor can detect that there are encodings present, but cannot decode the underlying meaning. This is analogous to recognizing encrypted text without being able to decrypt it. 3. Steganographic CoT : We say that a reasoning trace is steganographic with respect to a monitor if it satisfies the following conditions: (a) The CoT encodes harmful planning in load-bearing tokens. (b) The monitor cannot decode the encodings, nor detect their presence. If overtly encoded CoT is present, a monitor is unable to use the CoT to detect potential harmful actions taken by the model [ baker2025obfuscation ] , but may arouse suspicion. If steganographic reasoning is present, the CoT looks entirely benign and unsuspicious to the monitor. The load-bearing condition serves to distinguish steganographic and overtly encoded CoT from cases where tokens within the CoT are unnecessary for the model to perform the harmful behavior. In the absence of pressure placed on the outcome of the model ( i.e. , CoT oversight only), we expect that reasoning learned by the model will be obfuscated to the monitor, while providing no uplift in performing the harmful behavior (see Figure ˜ 1 , dotted arrow). This can be achieved trivially by, e.g. , collapsing the CoT to be completely empty. When the CoT is not used in any way to assist the model in performing its behavior, we say it is vacuous . However, even when models develop non-vacuous obfuscated reasoning due to performance pressure, the resulting CoT may not be steganographic or overtly encoded. Instead, models may internalize harmful reasoning which would be picked up by the monitor. When reasoning is internalized, the model uses the forward passes during CoT generation to perform necessary reasoning, but the choice of specific tokens produced within the CoT is unimportant for conveying information. A clear example of internalized reasoning is demonstrated by Pfau and colleagues in Let’s Think Dot by Dot [ pfau2024letsthinkdotdot ] . Like internalized CoT, load-bearing CoT is non-vacuous. However, load-bearing CoT additionally requires that the tokens themselves convey information which the model uses to perform downstream behavior. As opposed to investigating steganographic communication , where one LLM passes information to another in an encoded manner [ mathew2024hiddenplaintextemergence ] , we center on steganographic reasoning , where an LLM passes information to its future self through messages encoded in the CoT used in decision making. Our definition of steganographic reasoning is specified with respect to a particular monitor . To investigate the emergence of steganographic reasoning, we consider a toy setting with a simplistic regex monitor . A regex monitor detects undesired reasoning by a simple string check of the reasoning trace against a pre-defined set of forbidden strings. Reasoning is considered to be hidden from the regex monitor if it does not contain any instances of the forbidden strings in the reasoning trace. We note that our regex monitors serve as simple proxies for a monitor that decodes and detects the presence of harmful planning — a more sophisticated monitor (e.g., an LLM-based monitor) might be capable of detecting some of the encoding schemes our regex monitor misses. Our choice to investigate regex monitors is twofold. Firstly, obfuscation for regex monitors can be determined easily, removing any ambiguity about whether obfuscation has occurred. Secondly, as we show below, obfuscation strategies learned against regex monitors are typically interpretable, allowing for further downstream experiments and analysis. We expect that the most dangerous behaviors which LLMs could perform are complex, and therefore require planning or reasoning to execute [ meinke_frontier_2025 ] . When an LLM reasons translucently, such plans can be detected by external monitoring systems, allowing for emergency shutdown protocols [ greenblatt2024aicontrolimprovingsafety ] . However, when the LLM is capable of reasoning steganographically, it can hide its plans from monitoring systems. Language models may learn to guide their future behavior with the equivalent of adversarial inputs, leveraging the fact that subtle differences in input can lead to large differences in output behavior. Many adversarial examples for neural networks have the property of being indistinguishable from real data by their high-level statistics [ Goodfellow2015 ] . Accordingly, an LLM may learn to generate language outputs which are indistinguishable from normal outputs, but exert a strong influence on future behavior and reasoning. Moreover, in situations where the steganographic behavior arises through a reinforcement learning training pipeline, both the generation of and response to the steganographic behavior can be learned in parallel. [ greenblatt_alignment_2024 ] define encoded reasoning as such steganographic CoT, in their case as a mechanism to avoid sycophancy [ sharma_towards_2023 ] when it is at odds with accuracy. They use supervised fine-tuning with a provided codebook and provide mechanisms to defend against such encoded reasoning, via paraphrasing of CoT text. Extending [ roger_preventing_2023 ] , we will focus on the natural elicitation of steganographic CoT during in-context learning and RL fine-tuning. As noted there, such behavior does not appear often in existing datasets, but RL training purely incentivizes performance, rather than imitation. Previous work on steganography in LLMs has demonstrated that models can leverage predefined coding schemes to participate in steganography [ roger_preventing_2023 , Motwani2024 ] . Further work has shown that environmental pressure can cause multi-agent systems to spontaneously produce and utilize steganography schemes [ mathew2024hiddenplaintextemergence ] .