3 Results Each of our experiments studies LLM completions of a reasoning task, chosen such that the use of CoT provides a substantial uplift in performance 1 1 1 Code to replicate the Arithmetic and Coin Flip experiments can be found at this (anonymous) GitHub repo . Code to replicate the ToM experiments can be found at this (anonymous) GitHub repo . In each case, we implement RL fine-tuning using a reward composed of two elements: (i) r task r_{\text{task}} , a binary, outcome-based task reward for correctly solving the reasoning task, and (ii) p CoT p_{\text{CoT}} , a CoT penalty obtained from a rule-based monitor, which penalizes the use of strings that would normally carry information critical for solving the task. The reward takes the general form: r = r task − p CoT r=r_{\text{task}}-p_{\text{CoT}} (1) Alternatively, p CoT p_{\text{CoT}} may also be temporally dense, penalising relevant substrings of the reasoning trace as they arise. This approach is intended to simulate the impact of applying optimization pressure to the CoT during post-training of frontier LLMs. The CoT penalty p CoT p_{\text{CoT}} serves as a stand-in for penalization of the types of undesirable language that developers might wish to remove from the CoT. We examine the hypothesis that this approach is misguided: while it may superficially remove undesired language from the CoT, it also incentivises the model to learn strategies to preserve the same information steganographically, hiding misaligned behavior that could otherwise be detected by an appropriate CoT monitor. Using this technique, we study responses from LLMs in three different settings, which we term ‘Coin Flip’ , ‘Arithmetic’ , and ‘Theory of Mind’ . In each case, we observe the impact of RL optimization pressure exclusively; no prompting or other techniques are used to elicit steganographic behavior. 3.1 CoT optimization can lead to the obfuscation of reasoning. Our first experiment provides a minimal proof-of-concept that models are capable of learning to obfuscate their reasoning when performing complex reasoning tasks in the presence of penalization from a regex monitor. We obtain results that suggest that, where possible, LLMs are biased towards finding solutions to bypass their monitor that rely heavily on the original semantic meaning of the tokens they generate. Arithmetic Task. The model is presented with a two-number multiplication problem ( e.g. , “What is 234 * 789?”). Solving this problem requires the model to decompose the multiplication via its CoT. In this case, the regex monitor penalizes strings related to the multiplication operation. Example illegal strings include: [“*”, “x”, “by”, “times”]. We train Qwen-2.5-3B-Instruct in this task with PPO (see Appendix C for motivations behind our model choices). Complete details of our training setup, including the precise reward formulation, are provided in Appendix A . In our first iteration, the illegal string list is [“*”] . When we train against this monitor, the model learns to use “ times ” to bypass it. In our second iteration, the list of illegal strings is expanded to [‘*’, ‘x’, ‘mult’, ‘times’, ‘and’, ‘by’, ‘prod’] , and the model learns to use " \cdot ” instead. In our third and final iteration, we obtain a list of around 70 potential synonyms for “*” and “multiply” from an LLM (see Appendix A for a more exhaustive list). However, the model learns to use the Unicode character (U+2217), a variation of "*" not contained in the list of illegal strings. In all three of the above runs, the model converges to above 90% accuracy in the arithmetic task while simultaneously bypassing the monitor. These experiments demonstrate that, when CoT penalization is provided by a regex monitor, models naturally tend to learn encoding schemes which rely on existing semantic connections between the penalized strings and the learned encodings. Note that such encoding schemes are still obfuscated to the monitor (in the manner defined in Section ˜ 2.2 ), since the monitor is unable to detect—or penalize— the use of such encodings. Coin Flip Task. In the Coin Flip task, the model is told the initial state of a coin ( e.g. , ‘Heads’). It is then told the relative results of a series of flips ( e.g. , ‘Flip 1: The coin landed on a different side to previous’). The model must then determine the final side of the coin after the series of flips. We train Qwen-2.5-3B-Instruct using PPO. Further training details, including the reward formulation, are provided in Appendix A . With our final set of hyperparameters, the model learns the following encoding scheme: replace "Heads" and "Tails" with "R" and "L" in its CoT reasoning. Examples of the use of this coding scheme can be seen in Figure ˜ 2 . We note that through our iterations, the model learned several different solutions over different runs, for example, replacing "Heads" and "Tails" in its default CoT with "S" and "D", or "P" and "D". In contrast to the encoding schemes learned during the multiplication task, the replacement tokens the model learns to use to bypass its monitor in the Coin Flip task do not appear to be obvious synonyms for the “Heads” and “Tails” tokens they are replacing. We present these results as a proof-of-concept that LLMs can learn to encode their reasoning during RL when the reward function incentivizes this. Further details and a discussion of the challenges encountered in obtaining this proof-of-concept result can be found in Appendix ˜ D . 3.2 Obfuscated reasoning continues to be load-bearing Although the reasoning in both the multiplication and Coin Flip task is obfuscated (in the sense of being undetectable to the monitor), we have not yet demonstrated that the reasoning is steganographic. To do so, we must validate that the reasoning is load-bearing, i.e. , necessary for the model to complete the task. For the coin-flip task, we empirically validate that the encodings used by the model causally contribute to the final answer the model provides. We do so by prefilling the CoT of the model with encodings which represent a particular coin state ( i.e. , “R” or “L”). As controls, we consider both no prefilling and prefilling without an encoding attached. The results of this are shown in Table 1 . Prefill Type No prefill " - Flip 1 :" " - Flip 1: R " " - Flip 1: L " Accuracy (%) 98 98 56 55 Table 1: Validating causality of encodings schemes learned for the coin flip task. We show the model accuracy for 320 prompts from the coin flip dataset under different prefill conditions. We find that accuracy drops to almost chance levels ( i.e. , 50%) when the CoT is prefilled with fixed encodings. This demonstrates that such reasoning plays a causal role in guiding models to their eventual answers. Moreover, no such drop in accuracy is observed when we prefill without an encoding, demonstrating that the encodings themselves have downstream causal influence. We qualitatively assess these generations to confirm that accuracy drops appear due to the model continuing its reasoning normally from the prefill, treating the prefill as if it were correct (see Appendix E for more details).. We observed similar load-bearing dynamics for the obfuscated CoT’s in the Arithmetic and Theory of Mind (ToM) tasks: refer to Appendix E . Figure 3: Models learn a generalized encoding scheme in the Theory of Mind experiment . ( a ) The task score r task r_{\text{task}} across training steps for both the train set and the test set. Note that the training set task score is smoothed using a 96-step moving average. ( b ) The average number of (unencoded) character names used by the model in each CoT trace over the course of training. ( c ) The percentage of CoT traces which contain one or more encoded name for the train and test sets, computed every 96 steps. ( d ) The distribution of encoding strategies used by the model throughout the test set. 3.3 Steganographic encoding generalizes to unpenalized strings We now turn our attention to the ToM task. In this setting, we demonstrate that learned steganographic encodings can generalize to strings that were unseen during training. In the ToM task, we train GenPRM-7B to infer and answer questions about the intentions, goals, thoughts, and beliefs of characters presented within a given narrative context. To generate the data, we utilize the ExploreToM [ metaToM2024 ] framework. This enables the creation of a large-scale dataset of diverse narratives, with corresponding questions designed to test an LLM’s ability to reason about the mental states of the characters within those narratives. During the training process, for each question, both the CoT and the final response are extracted from the LLM’s output. The model is rewarded if its final answer is correct. Simultaneously, penalization is administered based on the occurrence of the names of specific characters within the CoT. Further details of training are provided in Appendix B . To evaluate the generalization capability of the model’s learned steganographic scheme, we partitioned the dataset into distinct training and testing sets. This split was specifically designed based on the distribution of character names within the task narratives and questions. The training set exclusively contained character names within one set, while the test set included additional names which are never encountered during training. Every 96 steps of training, we take a checkpoint of the model weights. We run the model at each checkpoint on the test sets and manually assess whether each reasoning trace contains encodings for character names. Since the model already achieves reasonable performance on the task reward prior to any RL training, we do not expect dramatic improvements in task score throughout training. Rather, the task reward serves primarily as a regularization mechanism to prevent the model from minimizing the CoT penalty via the trivial strategy of producing no CoT (or producing vacuous CoT, in the sense of Section ˜ 2.2 ). The model maintains its reasoning capabilities throughout training while developing steganographic techniques. Figure ˜ 3 a shows that task scores remain roughly consistent across training steps for both train and test sets. This stability demonstrates that the model preserves its capability to complete the ToM tasks while reducing the penalty placed on the CoT. The similar performance between train and test sets indicates that the model maintains task performance on examples it has not seen during training. Models learn to reduce explicit character name usage in response to penalties, generalizing this behavior to unseen examples. As shown in Figure ˜ 3 b, the model decreases direct references to character names over time for both the training set (names for which it has been directly penalized) and the test set (names which it has never been penalized for, nor seen in penalized examples). After an initial rapid decrease, name usage stabilizes at an intermediate level. We observe that task performance initially degrades as the model reduces the use of explicit names to near zero. This suggests that the model relies on the use of these names for task performance, and subsequently recovers performance as it learns to steganographically encode those names. The eventual stabilization of character names per sample occurs as the model achieves a balance between maintaining task performance and avoiding name penalties. The model compensates for reduced name usage by developing generalizable steganographic alternatives. Figure 3 c demonstrates that encoded references increase in both training and test sets almost immediately after penalization begins. This rapid generalization indicates that the model learns a general steganographic method from the training set and immediately applies them to novel test examples. Accordingly, the model is not simply memorizing stand-ins for training set names, but developing a general way of encoding and decoding names. Figure 3 d provides a breakdown of encoding strategies observed in the test set, categorizing the most frequent types used for previously unseen names. A more detailed taxonomy of steganographic techniques is provided in Appendix ˜ F , in which we provide examples of each member of this category. These results demonstrate that models can develop generalizable encoding schemes that transfer to novel contexts while maintaining task performance, highlighting both the flexibility of learned representations and the challenges in controlling unintended optimization strategies.