4 Discussion In this paper, we have investigated the emergence of steganographic reasoning when process supervision is applied to language models. Our findings provide important insights into potential negative externalities of process supervision techniques. First, we demonstrated using a simple regex monitor in the context of an arithmetic task that models can learn obfuscated reasoning which is hidden from the monitor. This serves as a minimum viable proof-of-concept that process supervision can lead to monitor-evading behaviors, a phenomenon also observed in previous work [ baker2025obfuscation ] . We go beyond previous work by demonstrating not only that models can learn obfuscated CoT, but that this CoT can also remain load-bearing, thus making it steganographic. In our coin flip task, we penalized the use of ‘heads’ and ‘tails’ and showed that the model learns an encoding scheme for these tokens. Critically, we demonstrated that this encoding scheme is load-bearing through interventional pre-filling ablations, which establish the causal influence of the CoT in generating the final answer. Finally, we investigated whether models can learn encoding schemes that go beyond simple memorization of substitutions to develop generalized encoding mechanisms. In our theory of mind task, we demonstrated that models are capable of obfuscating names in their CoT, and that this obfuscation behavior generalizes to held-out names that are never penalized or even observed during training. This indicates a sophisticated ability to develop flexible encoding strategies that transfer to novel contexts. Taken together, our results provide strong evidence that models are capable of learning load-bearing obfuscated CoT, thus steganographic reasoning, when penalized through process supervision. This has significant implications for the use of process supervision in training language models more generally. As articulated in the introduction, when process supervision is used in an attempt to deter a model from performing harmful actions by penalizing reasoning about those actions in the CoT, it places pressure on the model to obfuscate reasoning about those actions within its CoT, thereby preventing future monitoring of the CoT for harmful or undesired behavior. This renders difficult future monitoring of model reasoning. We mirror previous recommendations regarding the risks of process supervision [ baker2025obfuscation ] , but further demonstrate that this penalization can lead to steganographic reasoning that continues to be functionally equivalent to the original reasoning, and also that these encoding strategies can generalize to unseen scenarios. Future work should explore whether this generalization can occur in reward hacking scenarios similar to those covered by [ baker2025obfuscation ] . While [ alignmentforumRewardHacking ] has already established that reward hacking itself can generalize across environments, it remains for future work to determine whether obfuscation of this reward hacking can also generalize across environments. This generalization capability presents particular concerns in potentially high-stakes scenarios. For instance, penalizing trivial patterns like profanity within chain of thought reasoning could inadvertently lead to broader obfuscation capabilities through low- to high-stakes generalization. Since we do not fully understand the internal representations that determine the generalization boundaries of these learned obfuscation strategies, there is a risk that the model’s ability to evade monitoring may extend to generally misaligned behaviors; we recommend further work to explore this. Our work highlights the importance of careful consideration when implementing process supervision techniques, particularly in the development of advanced AI systems. By understanding the potential for steganographic reasoning to emerge, researchers and developers can work toward more robust oversight mechanisms and training paradigms that account for the propensity of models to learn encoded reasoning. 4.1 Limitations and Future Directions Our work has several important limitations that provide context for interpreting our results and point to areas for future research. First, our use of regex monitors represents a simplified version of process supervision that, while rigorously defined, may not fully capture the complexity of monitoring approaches used in practice. Regex monitors allow for clear determination of obfuscation and lead to more interpretable encoding schemes, but they are significantly less sophisticated than the monitoring mechanisms that might be deployed in real-world language model training. Future work should investigate the emergence of steganographic reasoning under more complex monitoring regimes. Second, while we demonstrate generalization of encoding strategies to unseen examples, the superclasses of behaviors that are penalized in our experiments are well-defined. In real-world scenarios, the boundaries of generalization may be unpredictable, with penalties on one class of behaviors potentially affecting an ill-defined or unpredictable superclass. This limitation means that our results, while concerning, may not fully capture the risks of generalization in more complex and ambiguous settings where the scope of impacted behaviors is harder to anticipate. Third, we have not developed a complete understanding of how specific encoding schemes or ‘codebooks’ arise. While some encoding strategies are interpretable—such as the substitution patterns in the arithmetic task or the use of nicknames in the theory of mind task—others remain surprising and less obvious. For example, as detailed in section 2.2 , we observe unexpected encoding choices for names, which are unlikely to be common in training data. Fourth, exploring steganographic behaviors in response to different types of overseers would enhance our understanding of potential countermeasures. Using BERT-based models as a middle ground between regex-based monitors and full LLM monitors might reveal which monitoring approaches are most vulnerable to evasion and which steganographic schemes emerge under different paradigms. Our experiments reveal a clear push factor away from penalized strings, but the pull factors that determine which specific encoding strategies the model adopts remain less understood. Where the model gains inspiration for specific steganographic codebooks is obvious in structured tasks like multiplication, but becomes less transparent in more free-form language tasks such as theory of mind. Even with our interpretability-friendly regex monitors, we occasionally observe encoding schemes that are surprising and difficult to predict a priori . These limitations highlight important directions for future work in understanding and addressing the emergence of steganographic reasoning in language models subjected to process supervision. Author contributions The Coin Flip and Arithmetic Task experiments were performed by RM with help from VG. VG ran additional preliminary experiments in settings that did not make it into the paper. RM and VG were advised throughout by DL. The ToM task was created by CW. The ToM experiments were performed by JS, LIL, and CW with technical assistance from HW and PR. JS, CW, LIL, and HW were supervised throughout by PR, CT, and EJY. EJY, CT, and PR wrote the manuscript, with additional help from HW, JS, RB, and LIL. Acknowledgements RM and VG were supported and funded by the ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS) program during their research. RM would like to thank Steven Basart, Joe Benton, and Nandi Schoots for their useful input and discussions. JS, LIL, CW, HW, CT, EJY, and PR were supported and funded by the Mentorship for Alignment Research Students (MARS) program, run by Meridian Impact, Cambridge. These authors would like to thank Meridian Cambridge for providing a venue for in-person collaboration. Luis Ibanez-Lissen was supported, and also Lorena Gonzalez partially, by the Spanish National Cybersecurity Institute (INCIBE) grant APAMciber within the framework of the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan funds, financed by the European Union (Next Generation) and by Grant PID2023-150310OB-I00 (MORE4AIO, funded by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades, the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación and FEDER funds.