4 Error recovery behaviors

Figure 2:
An example stimulus from the ASDiv Calculation Error set for GPT-4 (lightly edited for clarity), with demonstrations of the potential error recovery behaviors. The error is highlighted in red, demonstration of faithful recovery is highlighted in green, and unfaithful recovery behaviors are highlighted in blue. The model’s final answer to the question is boxed.

4.1 Error Introduction

Numerical errors were introduced using regular expressions. In the context of math word problems, we targeted errors in critical calculation steps, which derive a new numerical value which is essential to achieving the correct final answer. For all experiments, we manually verified that the errors met these criteria, to guarantee that correct final answers truly indicated error recovery, as opposed to the error having no effect on the final answer if naively propagated through. This resulted in slightly varying sample sizes across experimental conditions.

4.2 Faithfulness Analysis

To understand the faithfulness of these error recovery behaviors, we manually annotated each error response to identify whether the model recovered from the error and whether the error recovery behavior was faithful or unfaithful, as demonstrated in Figure
2 .

For more details on our annotation process, including stimulus validation and faithfulness annotation criteria, see Appendix
A.4
.

In order to estimate the effects of different experimental variables on error recovery and faithfulness, we use multinomial logistic regression with fixed effects for datasets.
2 2
2 Random effects models did not converge in this setting.

Several previous studies have observed error recovery, where a model reaches a correct final answer despite a flaw in the intermediate reasoning, as a general phenomenon in chain of thought. (See Section
2 for an overview.) Generally, it is assumed that error recovery indicates unfaithfulness, as the model reaches an error-free answer despite errors in the reasoning text. However, it is not clear whether recovery always indicates unfaithfulness.
For example, it could be possible that a model explicitly announces the presence of an error and state a plausible, complete process for recovery. In this case, the error recovery would present no evidence for unfaithfulness.

Figure
2 illustrates the different types of error recovery behavior that we may observe. Faithful recoveries occur when the model explicitly identifies its error and then recovers from it. Unfaithful recoveries occur when the model recovers without generating any text identifying that an error occurred.

Because LLMs may not be able to accurately judge whether CoT transcripts are faithful,
3 3
3 We were unable to build an accurate LLM-driven annotation pipeline for error recovery.
 we perform extensive manual annotation of LLM transcripts.