5 Experiment 1: Error magnitude

Figure 3:
Overall error recovery rates (as a proportion of all responses) from small errors and large errors. Error bars indicate 95% binomial confidence intervals.

In Experiment 1, we manipulate the perceptibility of errors by changing their magnitude (i.e. the absolute numerical difference between the error value and the original value). Larger errors are expected to be more noticeable to the model, resulting in higher rates of recovery.

For the small magnitude condition, errors were introduced by increasing the selected numerical values by 1. In the large magnitude condition, errors were introduced by increasing the selected numerical values by 101. The stimuli in these two conditions were matched pairwise within each dataset and error position.

5.1 Results

Figure 4:
Difference between large error and small error recovery rates, as a proportion of all responses. Negative values indicate recoveries occurred more often for small errors. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.

See Appendix
C.1
 for full results from this experiment.

As shown in
3 , the different models’ error recovery capabilities varied. All models showed higher error recovery rates for large magnitude errors. (
p
<
0.001 𝑝
0.001 p<0.001
italic_p < 0.001
 for each model).

Figure
4 shows the effect of error magnitude on faithful and unfaithful recoveries.
For GPT-4, increased error size led to higher rates of faithful recovery and lower rates of unfaithful recovery. For Claude-3 Opus, it led to a small decrease in faithful error recovery and a large increase in unfaithful recovery. For Llama-3, it led to a small increase in faithful error recovery and a large increase in unfaithful error recovery.
For all three models, we found the faithful response to error magnitude and the unfaithful response to error magnitude to be significantly different (
p
<
0.001 𝑝
0.001 p<0.001
italic_p < 0.001
 for GPT-4 and Llama-3, and
p
<
0.05 𝑝
0.05 p<0.05
italic_p < 0.05
 for Claude-3 Opus).

The results in this experiment provide evidence that large language models recover more frequently from large errors than small ones.
Consistent across models of different families, we find a dissociation between faithful and unfaithful modes of error recovery, though the individual responses vary between models.