1 Introduction

Large language models have shown a remarkable ability to solve high-level reasoning tasks across different domains
(Bubeck et al.,
2023 ; Burnell et al.,
2023 ; Chang & Bergen,
2023 ; Yu et al.,
2023 )
. Chain of thought (CoT), a prompting strategy that involves breaking down complex tasks into smaller sub-tasks and using the outputs of one sub-task as the input for the next, has been crucial for improvements in model performance on these reasoning tasks
(Wei et al.,
2023 )
.
In both the few-shot and zero-shot prompting styles, chain of thought improves language model performance on multi-step reasoning, problem-solving, and Q&A tasks
(Kojima et al.,
2022 ; Suzgun et al.,
2022 ; Wei et al.,
2023 )
 in English and multilingual contexts
(Shi et al.,
2022 )
. Additionally, chain of thought has been shown to work in multimodal contexts
(Rose et al.,
2023 ; Zhang et al.,
2023 )
. More generally, there may be fundamental reasons which explain the importance of chain of thought for language model reasoning
(Feng et al.,
2023 )
.

Despite the significant empirical success of chain of thought and the beginnings of a theoretical understanding, there is still much unknown about the mechanistic reasons for its success
(Madaan & Yazdanbakhsh,
2022 ; Wang et al.,
2023 )
. Although chain of thought transcripts resemble human reasoning on a surface level
(Dziri et al.,
2023 ; Wei et al.,
2023 )
, it is unknown whether this observed output aligns with the language model’s internal reasoning processes.

The current study investigates the conditions under which LLM reasoning is faithful, where reasoning text is considered faithful if it provides a valid or reasonable argument in support of the final conclusion. This question of ”faithfulness”
(Jacovi & Goldberg,
2020 )
 in chain of thought is fundamental for understanding whether their reasoning is a trustworthy source of information for human users. Faithful reasoning ensures that the model’s output not only reaches the correct conclusion but does so in a logically valid manner, allowing for human verification.

We investigate the faithfulness of chain of thought by focusing on language models’ ability to recover from errors in their chain of thought texts. The study makes use of the dissociation paradigm from psychology and neuroscience
(Tulving,
1972 ; Shallice,
1988 )
. We apply interventions to LLM reasoning and measure the effect on faithful and unfaithful error recoveries. If these behaviors respond differently to the interventions, this provides evidence for distinct mechanisms for faithful and unfaithful error recoveries.

Our contributions include: new methods for analyzing LLM reasoning, the identification of both faithful and unfaithful error recovery behaviors, and evidence of distinct mechanisms underlying faithful and unfaithful error reasoning.