2 Related work

2.1 Understanding chain of thought

Alkhamissi et al. (2023)
 and
Hebenstreit et al. (2023)
 empirically investigated the generalizability of chain of thought across distinct reasoning tasks.

Feng et al. (2023)
 proposed a mathematical framework for understanding chain of thought in arithmetic, emphasizing its role in enhancing transformer model expressiveness.
Wang et al. (2023)
 and
Madaan & Yazdanbakhsh (2022)
 conducted ablation studies to determine which information is critical for successful reasoning, with the former emphasizing the coherence of few-shot demonstrations and the latter focusing on symbols and structural patterns. Notably,
Wu et al. (2023)
 found that chain of thought increases robustness to input perturbations. Mechanistically,
Dutta et al. (2024)
 analyzed chain of thought generation as a composition of neural circuits in transformer models, tracing information flow through the model during reasoning generation.

2.2 Errors in chain of thought.

Language models have been observed to produce errors in chain of thought generation, and there have been some efforts to describe these errors.
For example,
Zhang et al. (2023)
 categorized chain of thought errors in a multi-modal system as ”hallucination” or ”other.” Similarly,
Nguyen et al. (2024)
 classify chain of though errors into factual errors, coherence errors, and answer errors, noting a discrepancy between chain of thought accuracy and answer accuracy, which may grow with model size.

McKenna et al. (2023)
 presented an investigation of reasoning errors in LLMs and attributed hallucination errors to memorization from their training corpus.
Dziri et al. (2023)
 provided more fine-grained categorizations of errors in generated reasoning chains, identifying that local errors can either propagate or be resolved in later reasoning steps. That work also provided theoretical arguments that the propagation effect should significantly overwhelm the recovery effect, making errors inevitable for arbitrarily long reasoning chains. This effect was similarly observed by
Arora et al. (2022)
, which developed a theoretical model for error propagation in model-generated text.

2.3 Faithfulness in chain of thought.

Recent research points to instances of unfaithful behavior in chain of thought.
Agarwal et al. (2024)
 distinguish ”plausible” explanations from ”faithful” ones and call for further research and development of both plausible and faithful systems.
Turpin et al. (2023)
 showed that language models can use chain of thought to unfaithfully rationalize answers that are derived from superficial cues in the prompt. To a similar effect,
Lanham et al. (2023)
 implemented counterfactual interventions on chain of thought texts, finding that LLMs can achieve the correct answer despite variations on their chain of thought, like early stopping and error introductions.
Gao (2023)
 also used counterfactual interventions, similar to those in the current study, and employed Shapley values to assess the significance of tokens in the model’s reasoning text. Importantly, both studies found that, despite logically disrupted reasoning, the model’s conclusions often remained unaffected. This suggests the model’s final answer is not always aligned with its generated reasoning text. To further understand this effect,
Bao et al. (2024)
 identify the ”instructions” of a task as a potential mediating factor in the disconnect between the chain of thought text and the model’s final answer.

Additional works examine faithfulness in similar textual reasoning contexts, including Free-text Rationales
(Wiegreffe et al.,
2021 )
 and Natural Language Explanations
(Atanasova et al.,
2023 )
. Across both CoT and NLE contexts,
Parcalabescu & Frank (2024)
 remark that existing faithfulness tests can be framed as measuring output consistency rather than internal model functioning.