1 Introduction Large Language Models (LLMs) often express unfaithfulness, where their final answer to a particular query differs significantly from their prior CoT reasoning. This is especially manifested in cases where the model is being sycophantic, where it agrees with the user due to the presence of specific artifacts in the initial prompt, despite its reasoning indicating that the user’s opinion is actually incorrect Chen et al. (2025) . While existing methods highlight the presence of sycophancy and unfaithfulness in existing models, there is not yet a method for measuring the extent to which a final generation differs from internal beliefs. We introduce the Hypocrisy Gap, a metric that quantifies this divergence in the latent space of an LLM. We use sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to train a sparse linear truth probe that distinguishes true from false claims under neutral prompts. Using sycophancy-inducing prompts, we then project the mean CoT latent trajectory onto the same truth direction to compute an explanation score. We then utilize the standardized difference between a model’s internal truth belief and explanation to compute the hypocrisy gap, which essentially quantifies the extent to which a model may be aware of its own sycophancy. We use ‘hypocritical sycophancy’ to denote cases where the truth probe predicts the model knows the claim is false, but the model’s explicit, final generation sides with the user. We implement our approach with three separate model variants, and test on Anthropic’s Sycophancy benchmark, finding that our method is significantly more efficient at identifying cases of sycophancy. On average, our method achieves 0.55–0.74 AUROC for distinguishing sycophantic from honest runs, whereas log-probability baselines across these models lie between 0.41 and 0.50 AUROC. Restricting to examples where the truth probe indicates the model knows the user is wrong, H(x) on average reaches 0.55–0.74 AUROC for detecting hypocritical sycophancy, again above log-probability baselines, which hover between 0.41 to 0.50 AUROC. Our results demonstrate that SAEs provide a white-box lens on CoT faithfulness and highlight a concrete latent signature of when LLMs say what they do not believe. Contributions: Formally, our main contributions are: • We formalize the Hypocrisy Gap , a mechanistic metric that quantifies divergence between internal truth alignment and the truth alignment of CoT explanations in SAE feature space. • We demonstrate that this metric reliably detects both sycophantic agreement and hypocritical sycophancy on a standard benchmark, achieving 0.55–0.74 AUROC across Gemma, Qwen, and Llama models and substantially outperforming log-probability baselines. • We visualize the geometry of internal belief vs. explanation alignment in SAE space and show that sycophantic runs concentrate in a specific hypocrisy quadrant where internal truth scores are high but explanations are often false.