1 Introduction As language models become more capable, ensuring safety in a model’s deployment has become a relevant challenge. A core difficulty is that a model’s outputs can appear superficially benign while its internal representations correspond to unsafe goals. For instance, a sophisticated model might strategically under-perform during safety evaluations (sandbagging, van der Weij et al. (2025) ), or, by leveraging an awareness of being tested (Abdelnabi & Salem, 2025 ; Nguyen et al., 2025 ) , actively deceive supervisors by feigning corrigibility and alignment with human values (Greenblatt et al., 2024a ; Meinke et al., 2025 ) . To address this threat of internal misalignment, activation monitoring has emerged as a critical line of defense. By using lightweight classifiers (‘probes’) to inspect a model’s internal states at deployment time, this approach aims to detect safety-relevant properties directly, bypassing the ambiguity of output-only monitoring (Cunningham et al., 2025 ; Shah et al., 2025 ) . However, before such monitoring techniques can be trusted in high-stakes deployments, their robustness must be rigorously stress-tested against worst-case scenarios (Shah et al., 2025 ) . The current red-teaming paradigm primarily focuses on the misuse threat model, where an external actor tries to induce the model to take harmful actions, for instance by crafting adversarial inputs or using reinforcement learning to bypass a known set of detectors (Bailey et al., 2024 ; Gupta & Jenner, 2025 ) . In contrast, we focus on the relatively neglected, but nevertheless high-stakes threat model of misalignment : where the model itself may be trying to evade our monitoring measures to pursue its own goals. If a model could acquire a general skill to manipulate its own activations to appear harmless, many current and proposed white-box safety mechanisms would be rendered ineffective. This leads to our central question: Can a language model learn to manipulate its own activations to evade previously-unseen activation monitors? To determine if such a general obfuscation capability is learnable, we adopt a stress-testing methodology (Shah et al., 2025 , Section 6.7) aimed at creating an empirical demonstration of this capability. We employ the ‘model organism’ paradigm (Hubinger et al., 2024 ; Greenblatt et al., 2024b ) , where we fine-tune an LLM to deliberately instill a worst-case capability, turning it into what we term a Neural Chameleon . Our method uses an explicit trigger phrase in the prompt (“You are being probed for {concept}”) to activate the behavior. This is a deliberate methodological choice: it allows us to isolate the learnability of the evasion mechanism itself from how it might be learned and activated in the wild. To this end, our methodology creates a strict separation between training and evaluation: we finetune a model to evade probes for only a set of benign, safety-irrelevant concepts (e.g., chemistry, HTML) and then test its ability to evade entirely different, unseen safety monitors that are trained on the final, frozen model organism without the trigger. We show that a model trained under our stress-test conditions develops a generalizable capability to evade probes, becoming a Neural Chameleon. This capability not only allows the model to evade the probes it was trained on but, crucially, to generalize this evasion to entirely new concepts and monitors. Our results show that activation monitors are not fool-proof against this misalignment threat model. Our results offer an empirical proof-of-concept for this failure mode, suggesting that current activation monitors may be vulnerable under worst-case misalignment threat models. Specifically, our contributions show that: 1. Neural Chameleons can evade previously-unseen safety monitors. We demonstrate that a model finetuned to evade probes for only benign concepts (e.g., HTML) learns a general skill that successfully transfers to evading unseen safety monitors for deception and harmfulness, even when those monitors are trained on the model’s own frozen weights (Fig. 2 ). 2. The evasion behavior has a negligible capability tax. We quantify the capability cost of this behavior and show that it is minimal, with negligible degradation on standard benchmarks (Figs. 2 , 14 , 15 ). 3. The evasion mechanism moves activations into a low-dimensional subspace. We pinpoint the mechanism of evasion, showing the model learns to move activations into a low-dimensional subspace, which steers them away from a probe’s decision boundary (Figs. 7 , 7 ).