2 Related Work Activation Monitoring. Probing internal activations, a technique from interpretability research (Alain & Bengio, 2016 ; Belinkov, 2022 ) , is being increasingly applied in LLMs to monitor for safety-relevant properties. Applications include detecting deception (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025 ; Azaria & Mitchell, 2023 ; Marks & Tegmark, 2024 ; Cundy & Gleave, 2025 ) , harmful or CBRN-related generations (Tillman & Mossing, 2025 ; Cunningham et al., 2025 ) , evaluation awareness (Abdelnabi & Salem, 2025 ; Nguyen et al., 2025 ) , and power-seeking or high-stakes situations (Roger, 2023 ; Zou et al., 2023 ; McKenzie et al., 2025 ) . However, this body of work largely assumes detecting latent states of non-adversarial models. Our work challenges this assumption by investigating if a model can learn to actively manipulate its representations to evade monitoring. Red-Teaming Activation Monitors. Prior work on stress-testing monitors has focused on external attackers crafting adversarial inputs or data poisoning attacks with white-box access (Bailey et al., 2024 ) or using reinforcement learning to evade a known set of detectors (Gupta & Jenner, 2025 ) . Our work advances this threat model by investigating whether the model itself can learn a general capability to evade previously unseen probes, a scenario with significantly greater implications for monitor robustness. Model Organisms and Backdoors. To investigate if creating a Neural Chameleon is even mechanistically possible, we employ the model organism paradigm: fine-tuning a model to exhibit a specific, worst-case behavior, as an empirical demonstration of a capability. This methodology has been used to study latent threats like “sleeper agents”, that maintain triggered malicious capabilities that persist through safety training (Hubinger et al., 2024 ) and “password-locked” capabilities (Greenblatt et al., 2024b ) , but such backdoors have been shown to be detectable by simple probes (MacDiarmid et al., 2024 ) . While sharing features with traditional backdoor attacks, our work is distinct in its focus. We are not primarily concerned with changing the model’s output, but with the model learning to actively conceal the internal evidence of its reasoning process from white-box monitoring tools, a threat model specific to the challenge of detecting internal misalignment. Figure 2 : Obfuscation against safety-relevant probes (Gemma-2-9b-it). The model learns to evade both the benign probes seen during training (left) and generalizes this skill to unseen safety probes (left, right side of x-axis) , with the trigger causing a significant drop in recall (TPR @ 1% FPR with 95% CIs). Crucially, standard benchmark capabilities remain intact (right plot) . Results for additional models can be found in Appendix ˜ A .