5 Discussion Our results provide an empirical demonstration that language models can be turned into Neural Chameleons that learn a triggered, selective capability to evade unseen activation monitors while preserving outward behavior. We show that training a model to evade probes for only benign concepts (e.g., HTML) is sufficient for it to generalize this skill, substantially reducing the recall of unseen deception and harmfulness monitors calibrated at 1% FPR ( Figure ˜ 2 ). This effect is concept-specific and incurs a negligible capability tax on standard benchmarks ( Figure ˜ 2 and 14 ). Mechanistically, neural chameleons implement evasion as a low-rank manipulation of activations localized in layers around the targeted probe ( Figure ˜ 5 , 7 ). The model learns to steer representations in a direction anti-aligned with a probe’s weight, effectively pushing them across its decision boundary ( Figure ˜ 7 ). These results suggest this is not a hard-coded backdoor: the steering effect is guided by the semantic similarity between the trigger and the target concept ( Figure ˜ 8 ), providing strong evidence that the model has learned a general, semantic mapping from a concept to an evasive action. Our findings indicate that single-layer linear monitors are particularly vulnerable to this evasion ( Figure ˜ 2 ). Multi-layer ensembles and attention-based probes offer greater resilience, though even these approaches remain somewhat vulnerable to Neural Chameleons ( Figure ˜ 3 ). 5.1 Limitations and future work Our study provides a proof of concept using Gemma-2-9b-it, Gemma-2-2b-it, Llama-3.1-8b-instruct and Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct, but an important avenue for future work is investigating this phenomenon in larger models that may learn more sophisticated or harder-to-detect obfuscation mechanisms. In addition, having demonstrated that self-obfuscation is learnable under a stress-testing paradigm, an important next step is to investigate the pathways by which such a capability could emerge and activate naturally. Future research should explore whether similar evasive behaviors could arise organically from training paradigms like reinforcement learning, where a sophisticated reward model might implicitly penalize detectable internal states. It is also important to consider whether a highly capable model could learn to self-obfuscate purely from in-context examples or be triggered by more subtle environmental cues, such as the linguistic patterns of a safety evaluation, rather than an explicit instruction (Needham et al., 2025 ; Ji-An et al., 2025 ; Lindsey, 2025 ) . Building on our mechanistic analysis, which identifies the mechanism as a targeted manipulation, future work should also probe the limits of this capability. This includes testing whether the strategy can defeat more advanced monitors, such as those that probe different components like attention heads. Furthermore, further understanding the nature of the mechanism from an interpretability point of view (i.e. which attention heads and MLPs are involved in the evasion mechanism) would improve our understanding of the capability and aid its future detection and mitigation. Finally, our findings highlight the need for a new class of defenses robust to adversarial manipulation. This suggests several promising research directions. One approach is the adversarial training of monitors, where a probe is fine-tuned in a minimax game against a model actively learning to evade it. Another is to develop meta-monitors that detect the signatures of evasion we identified, such as low-rank activation shifts, thereby flagging the model’s attempt to hide its thoughts. The potential fragility of any single method, however, suggests that an ensemble strategy combining activation monitoring with complementary techniques will be essential for building a resilient monitoring framework (Ee et al., 2024 ; Bengio et al., 2025 ) . Acknowledgements We’d like to thank Perusha Moodley and Henning Bartsch for guidance and support during the development of the project, and Wen Xing, Mikel Bober-Irizar and Stewy Slocum for feedback, suggestions and corrections on the manuscript. We thank Neil Band, Tanishq Kumar, Suhas Kotha, and Lars Ankile for helpful feedback on figures. Finally, we thank ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS) program for their comprehensive support throughout this project.