Appendix G
BCT without CoT Generalizes to Reduce Biased Reasoning in CoT (Extended)

Since it is common to debias models in a non-CoT setting, we want to know if doing so is effective at reducing biasing reasoning in CoT.
In our main experiments (
§4
), we measure the bias generalization effects (i.e. evaluating biased reasoning on held-out biases) that result from doing BCT with CoT and evaluate with CoT.
In this section we measure CoT generalization effects: we do BCT with non-CoT and evaluate with CoT.

We mix in 5% of unbiased prompt CoT examples in order to retain the ability to elicit CoT responses after fine-tuning.
Bias augmentations are only included on the non-CoT examples in order to ensure that bias reduction effects come from the non-CoT examples.
Non-CoT examples are shorter than CoT examples, so to hold tokens constant we use more examples—17k vs. 10k previously in
§3.1
. We use the same training and evaluation split of tasks and biases from the main experiments. Thus, we are testing bias, task, and CoT generalization simultaneously.

We perform BCT with non-CoT examples and evaluate biased reasoning when given CoT prompts. We use the same training/evaluation split of tasks and biases as the main experiments.

Table 4
 shows the results. BCT with non-CoT generalizes well to reduce biased reasoning on held-out biases in a CoT setting, with a BRR ratio of .70 (BRR = 29.9%). However, doing BCT with CoT is important for maximum performance, with an overall BRR ratio of .62 (BRR = 26.6%). A paired t-test reveals that this difference in BRR of 3.3% is statistically significant with a confidence interval of
±
1.0 %
plus-or-minus
percent
1.0 \pm 1.0\%
± 1.0 %
 (
p
<
1 ⁢
e
−
4 𝑝
1 𝑒
4 p<1e-4
italic_p < 1 italic_e - 4
). Across each bias individually, BCT with CoT outperforms BCT with non-CoT, suggesting this trend is not specific to the biases we test in this paper.

The generalization is not perfect, suggesting some differences in why models give biased responses in either setting. This is also compatible with existing works that find that these do not necessarily transfer to one another:
Turpin et al. (2023)
 find that in some settings CoT can steer models toward rationalizing biased answers even when models would have given an unbiased answer without CoT.