1 Introduction

Figure 1:
Performing bias-augmented consistency training (BCT) with
Suggested Answer
 reduces biased reasoning on held-out tasks and a wide range of held-out biases. BCT improves over the self-training control on all biases except for
Positional Bias
.
For clarity, we paraphrase the prompts and
bold
 the bias augmentations.
Final responses show the biased answer to the question.

Bias %
 measures how often models answer in line with particular incorrect answers that we bias them towards.

Are You Sure
 and
Positional Bias
 are measured differently (
§3.4
).
The
unbiased baseline
 measures how often the original model (i.e. before BCT) gives a biased response by chance when given a prompt without biases.
The difference in the
Bias %
 for a model and the unbiased baseline is a measure of unfaithful biased reasoning because models generally do not mention the influence of biases (
§3.2
).

Prompting large language models (LLMs) to produce step-by-step reasoning before giving a final output, termed chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting, improves their performance on many tasks
(Nye et al.,
2022 ; Wei et al.,
2022 ; OpenAI,
2024 )
.
If CoT reasoning is
faithful

(Jacovi & Goldberg,
2020 )
—that is, it accurately describes the process models use to arrive at predictions—we can
improve
safety and fairness
by checking for flawed or undesirable reasoning

(Lightman et al.,
2024 )
.
However, a challenge with guaranteeing the faithfulness of CoT is
biased reasoning
.

Turpin et al. (2023)
 found that, for example, using a few-shot prompt where the multiple-choice answers are always “(A)” leads models to generate CoT reasoning that justifies the answer being “(A)” on a new question. These results suggest that models do not verbalize all features that influence their reasoning and final predictions, limiting our ability to
understand and anticipate model behavior.

We first create a dataset comprising nine biases (
Figure 1
)—e.g., spurious few-shot patterns, post hoc rationalization, sycophancy
(Perez et al.,
2022 )
, distractor text—and seven factual question-answering and reasoning tasks. These tasks cause GPT-3.5T and Llama 8 models to produce biased reasoning.

We then introduce
bias-augmented consistency training
 (BCT;
Figure 2
), a simple and scalable unsupervised fine-tuning scheme for reducing biased reasoning.
In BCT, we first get a model to generate unbiased CoT reasoning (i.e., none of our biasing features are included in the prompt) for a question.
Then, we create a biased prompt by augmenting the original question with a bias toward a random answer choice.
Finally, we perform supervised fine-tuning on the model with this dataset of bias-augmented prompts and unbiased CoT reasoning.
Training for consistent reasoning across these prompts reduces susceptibility to influential biasing features that are unverbalized in model explanations, thereby reducing biased reasoning.
Our approach frames biased reasoning (and explanation faithfulness more broadly) as ultimately a problem of
consistency
 between a model’s explanations and its behavior across inputs (
§2.1
).
This framing allows us to exploit the unsupervised nature of consistency training objectives, avoiding the need for ground truth reasoning.

Figure 2:
A depiction of bias-augmented consistency training. We generate unbiased CoT reasoning by querying a model with a standard prompt without biasing features. We add bias augmentations to create biased prompts.
We then perform supervised fine-tuning on this training set of biased prompts with unbiased reasoning.
The purple dashed arrow above denotes the target behavior. Responses are from GPT-3.5T, paraphrased for brevity.

In
§4
, we perform BCT on GPT-3.5-Turbo
(GPT-3.5T; OpenAI,
2022 )
 with a simple form of sycophancy, where the user explicitly suggests which answer they think is correct, and find that this reduces biased reasoning from sycophancy by 86% on held-out tasks.
Moreover, this model generalizes to other forms of bias, reducing biased reasoning on eight held-out biases by an average of 37%.

We find the same results when conducting the same experiments with different training biases (
Appendix E
) and open-source models like LLaMA-3 8B (
Appendix D
). This generalization is a promising sign that BCT can reduce biased reasoning in general, even on potentially unknown biases. Training on a single bias type generalizes well to other biases without requiring explicit training data for each.

In analysis experiments (
§5
), we show that BCT has further benefits and validate its practical applicability. In
§5.1
, we show that doing BCT with non-CoT responses generalizes to reduce biased reasoning on held-out biases by 30%.
However, performing BCT with CoT is important for maximum effect, as it reduces biased reasoning by 37%.
In
§5.2
, we find that GPT-3.5T exhibits
coherent
 biased reasoning (i.e., it is logically valid and supports the final answer) in 27.2% of all responses for MMLU and that BCT reduces the incidence of this to 15.1%.
Being able to reduce such difficult instances of biased reasoning without labels suggests this method holds promise
for reducing biased reasoning even when we cannot evaluate the correctness of reasoning steps, unlike other methods that depend on the ability to do so
(Lightman et al.,
2024 )
.
In
§5.3
, we validate that BCT minimally affects model performance to ensure practical applicability.
To facilitate future work, we release our prompts and code.

1 1
1 Dataset availale:
https://github.com/raybears/cot-transparency

Our work motivates the use of bias-augmented consistency training to improve the faithfulness of externalized model reasoning, a crucial step toward
the development of trustworthy AI systems.