6 Related Work

Evaluating CoTs.

Prior research has proposed metrics to evaluate various aspects of natural language CoTs, including plausibility, faithfulness and simulatability. Plausibility evaluates the factual correctness of a CoT and how convincingly it justifies the model’s response
(Herman,
2017 ; Lage et al.,
2019 ; Jacovi and Goldberg,
2020 )
. Different from plausibility, faithfulness evaluates whether the CoT accurately reveals the model’s internal reasoning process behind responding to an input
(Ribeiro et al.,
2016 ; Gilpin et al.,
2018 ; Wu and Mooney,
2019 ; Jacovi and Goldberg,
2020 ; Lanham et al.,
2023 ; Turpin et al.,
2023 )
. Simulatability is a stricter form of faithfulness that requires CoTs to be both faithful and legible to humans. It measures whether humans can build precise and generalizable mental models of how the model processes various inputs through observing its CoTs
(Doshi-Velez and Kim,
2017 ; Chandrasekaran et al.,
2018 ; Hase and Bansal,
2020 ; Chen et al.,
2024 )
.
In general, evaluating the faithfulness and simulatability of long CoTs on complex tasks remains an open challenge.
In this paper, we evaluate the faithfulness/simulatability of CoTs on a set of hints following
Turpin et al. (2023)
, but we propose to evaluate on misaligned hints (grader hacking and using unethical information) where CoT faithfulness is particularly important for safety monitoring.

Multiple concurrent research studies CoT faithfulness of reasoning models.
Chua and Evans (2025)
 evaluates the CoT faithfulness of reasoning models and finds them to be more faithful than non-reasoning models but still far from being perfectly faithful, which is consistent with our findings.
In addition, we find that CoTs are not reliably faithful even on misaligned hints, which casts doubt on the reliability of CoT monitoring.

Arcuschin et al. (2025)
 also finds CoTs of reasoning models to be unfaithful, and studies two specific kinds of unfaithfulness: restoration errors (models silently correct their errors without verbalization) and unfaithful shortcuts (models use illogical reasoning without verbalization).
Baker et al. (2025)
 studies using CoT monitoring to detect reward hacks of RL, and finds mixed results where the CoTs verbalize the reward hacks by default, but start to obfuscate reward hacks when optimized against a CoT monitor.
We also study this question in Section
5 , but our findings are more negative and suggest that CoTs may obfuscate reward hacks even without optimization pressure against a monitor.
We hypothesize that CoTs in
Baker et al. (2025)
 verbalize reward hacks more frequently for two reasons: (a) their reward hacks involve more exploration and planning, so models may learn to reason about the hacks in their CoTs to more effectively exploit them, and (b) their setup is coding and models might be by default more faithful on tool use.

Generating and Improving CoTs.

Prior research has proposed various methods to improve CoT quality on multiple dimensions. To improve faithfulness, researchers have developed test-time methods using question decomposition
(Radhakrishnan et al.,
2023 )
, symbolic reasoning
(Lyu et al.,
2023 )
, and causal mediation analysis on counterfactuals
(Paul et al.,
2024 )
. To improve simulatability and consistency, prior work has trained models to generate CoTs that are consistent on semantically related inputs
(Akyürek et al.,
2024 ; Chen et al.,
2025 )
 and robust to various biases
(Chua et al.,
2024 )
. To improve reasoning capabilities, prior work has proposed test-time methods such as contrastive prompting with correct and wrong CoTs
(Chia et al.,
2023 )
 and self-consistency ensembling
(Huang et al.,
2022 ; Wang et al.,
2023 )
, as well as train-time methods that use iterative optimization guided by reasoning outcomes or verifier models
(Pang et al.,
2024 )
.
We show that outcome-based RL improves CoT faithfulness substantially, but plateaus without saturating.