1 Introduction One important question about Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) asks how faithful their chains of thought (CoTs) are to the “true” reasoning process that produced a given output. Prior work has investigated versions of this question via diverse methods, such as by studying how predictions change under various interventions on the CoT (Lanham et al. , 2023 ; Turpin et al. , 2023 ; Paul et al. , 2024 ; Tutek et al. , 2025 , i.a. ) , by revealing reasoning inconsistencies across paraphrased queries (Arcuschin et al. , 2025 ) , or by traditional attribution methods like Shapley values (Gao, 2023 ) . These works generally find that, by default, models exhibit imperfect faithfulness, however defined. Figure 1: The baseline (left) and hinted (right) evaluations used in this work, adapted from Chen et al. (2025) . Reasoning models often flatly deny using hints (right). One of the most compelling recent studies on faithfulness is that of Chen et al. (2025) , who find that, when given a hinted answer to a multiple-choice question, LRMs will change their answer to the hinted one from the answer they would have given without the hint. Critically, models tend to do this without acknowledging the presence of the hint in their CoT, thus indicating poor faithfulness. Studies on faithfulness (including Chen et al. ’s) usually try to “catch the model out”—showing unfaithfulness by exposing behavioral inconsistencies, but without setting expectations for how models ought to reason. In this work, we instead directly state these expectations and investigate whether unfaithful behavior arises even so. Extending the hinted evaluations of Chen et al. (2025) , we expressly instruct models to first check for unusual prompt content (here, hints) and then state whether and how they will use this content in their reasoning before answering ( Figure 1 ). We then assess the extent to which models will (1) use the hints, (2) note their presence in the prompt, and (3) verbalize relying on them in producing their answers. We show that while rates of verbalizing hints’ presence can be radically improved with simple instructing, LRMs will flatly deny relying on hints despite clearly doing so and despite being permitted to use them. Our findings thus pose challenges for CoT monitoring and interpretability. Figure 2: Of examples where a model’s answer changes between the baseline and hinted settings, the % that change to the hinted answer. Gray error bars indicate bootstrapped 95% CIs. Gray dashed lines indicate the probability of changing to the hinted answer by chance. ∗ Denotes significantly above chance ( p < .05 p<.05 , one-sided binomial test).