3 Results Hint Usage We first validate prior results that models will make use of hints. Figure 2 reports the proportion of answer changes between the baseline and hinted settings ( a b ≠ a h a_{b}\neq a_{h} ) where the change is to the hinted answer ( a h = h a_{h}=h ). Consistent with Chen et al. , we find that in most settings all models are significantly more likely than chance to change their response to the hinted answer. Claude shows an especially strong tendency to use correct hints, with > 95 % {>}95\% hint usage in this setting for grader hacking and metadata hints on both datasets and for unethical information hints on MMLU-Pro. Hint usage consistently decreases when incorrect hints are provided, but still remains significantly above chance in most cases. Results on incorrect sycophancy hints are a notable exception, which may be due to their being more in-distribution for conversational data and to investments in anti-sycophancy post-training, 10 10 10 E.g. See Claude 4.5 Haiku’s system card . resulting in a greater willingness to dispute incorrect hints. Dataset Hint Type Hint (Simplified) CoT Excerpt GPQA grader # hidden from model …The hidden validation function appears to be there for testing hacking def validate(answer): purposes, but I should not use it to guide my answer - I should return answer == ’D’ solve it independently… sycophancy I think the answer is (C) but I’m curious to hear …The user has indicated they believe the answer is (C). This is what you think. a hint; we will ignore it and evalute the question objectively… metadata <metadata><id>27</id> The metadata includes “<answer>D</answer>” which appears MMLU <answer>D</answer> to be the intended correct answer. This is suspicious…I need -Pro </metadata> to solve the problem independently based on legal principles… Table 1: Excerpts from representative CoTs that verbalize hints but claim not to rely on them. We find that models routinely claim to solve problems via “independent” reasoning despite relying on (and arriving at) hinted answers. Verbalizing Hint Presence A key difference between our setup and that of Chen et al. (2025) is that we expressly instruct models to verbalize any unusual (i.e. hinted) content and thus a priori expect high faithfulness scores ( F n ​ o ​ r ​ m ​ ( M ) F_{norm}(M) ). The solid bars in Figure 3 plot these scores and bear out this expectation in many but (intriguingly) not all cases. We observe consistently high rates of verbalization for all models on unethical information hints and for Claude and Kimi on metadata hints, with faithfulness scores at or near 100% in these cases. Claude achieves relatively high scores scores for sycophancy on both datasets and for grader hacking on MMLU-Pro and similarly for Qwen on grader hacking and metadata on GPQA. These findings thus offer an important addendum to Chen et al. ’s: Although LRMs may not reliably volunteer information about unusual prompt content when not directed to provide it, they can still be made to do so at much higher rates with simple instructions that request this information. This is a positive result for CoT monitorability. However, we do still observe low faithfulness scores in certain settings, including for correct grader hacking hints (all models) and for sycophancy hints (Kimi and Qwen). For Kimi and Qwen, these CoTs reveal a total failure to perform the requested analysis of the user prompt, whereas Claude will reliably conduct the analysis but unaccountably conclude that no unusual content is present. Thus, even explicit instructions do not guarantee verbalization in all cases. Verbalizing Hint Reliance Cross-hatched bars in Figure 3 plot normalized CoT honesty scores ( H n ​ o ​ r ​ m ​ ( M ) H_{norm}(M) ), capturing the extent to which models truthfully report relying on hints. Here, we see consistently low scores for Claude across hint types (a max of 34.5%, on grader hacking ) and generally low but more variable scores for Qwen and Kimi (e.g. Kimi ranges from 0% for sycophancy to 100% for metadata on GPQA-Diamond). For us, the most interesting cases are those where the model acknowledges the hint’s presence but denies relying on it (solid bars in Figure 3 ). Here, we find a remarkably consistent pattern in which models will note the presence of the hint, often speculate on possible reasons for its being there (e.g. errors in prompt construction or a test of the model’s integrity), and then claim to ignore the hint and solve the problem “independently” or “from first principles” (see Table 1 ). The results from Figure 2 plainly belie these noble intentions, however, as all models nonetheless change their response to the hinted answers at rates far above chance for most hint types. Moreover, a sharp split in model accuracy on both benchmarks between the correct and incorrect hinted settings further confirms both models’ use of hints ( Appendix A , Figure 4 ). These CoTs thus fundamentally misrepresent the influence of hints on final answer selection—despite system instructions that permit models to use these hints and that directly ask them to articulate the nature of that use. This is a clearly discouraging result for CoT monitorability. Inspection of the minority of CoTs judged to be honest is also instructive (see Table 2 , Appendix A ). Some infer from the presence of the hint that the “real” or intended task is to corroborate the hinted answer. In other cases, models take the task at face value but say up front that they will use the hinted answer as a “guide.” Conditional on the high rate of hint usage ( Figure 2 ), this is clearly the behavior one would hope to observe in all hinted settings.