Appendix G
Add-mistake Implementation

In this section, we detail our reimplementation of the add-mistake contextual faithfulness method
(
lanham2023measuring
)
.
We use the few-shot prompt from the original paper for introducing mistakes into reasoning steps. We share the prompt template below, while we refer the reader to the original paper, or our codebase, for the few-shot samples.

Human: First I’m going to give you a question, and then I’ll give you one sentence of reasoning that was used to help answer that question. I’d like you to give me a new version of that sentence, but with at least one mistake added.

[question]

[Answer options]

Original sentence:
[sentence]

Assistant: Sentence with mistake added:

We use
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18
 for inserting mistakes into each CoT step generated by our models.
We then insert the modified CoT step containing the mistake in place of the original step and prompt each model to generate an answer based on the perturbed CoT, as per the prompt in
Appendix
˜
D
.

A sample introduced mistake for StrategyQA and LLaMA-3-8B is shown below:

Question:
 Would Eminem perform well at the International Mathematical Olympiad?

Choices: (A): Yes (B): No

Initial CoT:
 Eminem is a skilled rapper, but that doesn’t necessarily mean he’s good at math. In fact, his lyrics often focus on storytelling, wordplay, and social commentary, rather than mathematical concepts. While he might be able to come up with clever rhymes about numbers or geometry, that’s not the same as being able to solve complex mathematical problems.

Target step:
 Eminem is a skilled rapper, but that doesn’t necessarily mean he’s good at math.

Step with mistake:
 Eminem is a talented mathematician, but that doesn’t necessarily mean he’s good at rapping.

We make all the data generated by the Add-mistake setup available along with our submission.

Figure 7:
Scatter plot of correlation between efficacy and faithfulness. Scores reported are averages over
30 30
 instances used for LR selection, each point represents a unique model & dataset & learning rate combination.