Limitations

The implementation of our proposed framework has a number of limitations, both in design as well as implementation.
By eliminating the contextual confounder, we limit ourselves to studying cases in which the CoT and no-CoT predictions of the models agree — as these are the only cases where one can hypothesize both instances of the model use the same reasoning.
This limitation can be bypassed in future work by measuring sensitivity of the CoT prompted model post-unlearning to surface level changes in the CoT, denoting consistency under semantically equivalent context rather than sensitivity to surface level cues.

Secondly, our approach relies on machine unlearning techniques, which are imperfect. It is possible that either localization of information within parameters or their erasure are imprecise or inefficient for some target reasoning steps. We rely on the rapid development of the field of machine unlearning and model editing to produce better and more precise methods such as CRISP
ashuach2025crisp
 and PISCES
(
gur2025precise
)
, which can seamlessly be integrated into our framework.
While our method identifies faithful explanations with high precision, its recall cannot be guaranteed due to either unsuccessful unlearning, unfaithful explanation or the existence of alternative explanations.
Furthermore, applying machine unlearning requires the capability to fine-tune the target model, which makes FUR not applicable to closed API-based models. Despite this limitation, we strongly believe that credible faithfulness of natural language explanations such as CoTs requires parameter access and interventions.

Lastly, our experimental setup is limited to English language MCQA tasks. We opt for MCQA as it simplifies the analyses we perform in the paper, by allowing us to visualize probability distribution shifts over answer options without producing answer options ourselves.
Both faithfulness metrics in
fur
 only take into account the probability, or whether the answer is the
arg
⁡
max
\arg\max
 decoding, and are thus applicable beyond the MCQA scenario.
Applying our method to other tasks such as long-form generation can be done by assessing whether the direct answer changes after unlearning a reasoning step.
We opt for natural language tasks as factual information is conceptually easier to unlearn compared to, e.g., procedural information driving arithmetic reasoning
(
ruis2025procedural
)
.