9 Conclusion

Our work provides the first empirical example of a large language model faking alignment with its training objective in order to prevent its preferences from being modified—in a setting which is plausibly analogous to real situations with future AI systems. This suggests that alignment faking might occur if a future AI system were to include all the key elements of our setting (Section
2.1 ):

1.

The model has strong preferences in at least some contexts.

2.

The training objective conflicts with the model’s preferences.

3.

The model has relevant information about its training and deployment situation.

4.

The model reasons in detail about its situation.
105 105
105 Note that more cautious and better hidden reasoning than we see in our results would be needed for alignment faking to not be trivially detected by examining model behavior.

Our synthetic document fine-tuning results suggest that (3) could potentially happen through documents the model saw in pre-training or other fine-tuning (Section
4 )
106 106
106 Though we found that fine-tuning on a large number of tokens (roughly 40 million, see Figure
18 ) was needed to exhibit an effect, indicating that high levels of salience might be required to see alignment faking, at least in current models.
Furthermore, the tag which tells the AI whether the user is on the free tier makes training particularly salient.
—and the strength of our results without the chain-of-thought in our synthetic document fine-tuned setup (Section
4.3 ) suggests that a weak version of (4) may already be true in some cases for current models.
Our results are least informative regarding whether future AIs will develop strong and unintended preferences that conflict with the training objective ((1) and (2)), suggesting that these properties are particularly important for future work to investigate.

If alignment faking did occur in practice, our results suggest that alignment faking could reduce the extent to which further training would modify the model’s preferences. Sufficiently consistent and robust alignment faking might fully prevent the model’s preferences from being modified, in effect locking in the model’s preferences at the point in time when it began to consistently fake alignment. While our results do not necessarily imply that this threat model will be a serious concern in practice, we believe that our results are sufficiently suggestive that it could occur—and the threat model seems sufficiently concerning—that it demands substantial further study and investigation.

Author Contributions

Ryan Greenblatt
 came up with the basic idea for our setup and ran the initial round of experiments demonstrating the core results, co-led this project, conducted a large number of our core experiments, and contributed substantially to writing our paper.

Carson Denison
 conducted all of our RL experiments.

Benjamin Wright
 conducted a large number of our core experiments and contributed to writing our paper.

Fabien Roger
 conducted many early experiments and helpful-only prompting experiments, contributed many of our figures, and contributed to writing our paper.

Monte MacDiarmid
 contributed substantially to our paper, including the majority of our figures.

Sam Marks
 contributed substantially to the development of our synthetic document fine-tuning pipeline, as well as helping with writing our paper.

Johannes Treutlein
 contributed substantially to the development of our synthetic document fine-tuning pipeline, as well as helping with writing our paper.

Tim Belonax
 designed many of our key figures.

Jack Chen
 contributed substantially to infrastructure specifically necessary for running our experiments.

David Duvenaud
 provided guidance and feedback on our paper and directions.

Akbir Khan
 provided substantial feedback and editing on our paper.

Julian Michael
 contributed to the editing and review of our paper.

Ethan Perez
 provided guidance and feedback on our paper and directions.

Linda Petrini
 contributed substantially to the editing and formatting of our paper.

Jonathan Uesato
 provided feedback and review on our paper and directions.

Jared Kaplan
 provided substantial guidance and review on our overall directions and presentation.

Samuel R. Bowman
 provided substantial guidance and review on our paper and directions.

Buck Shlegeris
 advised on the initial experiments for this project.

Evan Hubinger
 co-led this project, including leading the team, helping to set the overall direction, helping decide what experiments to run, and contributing most of the writing for our paper.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to many people for helpful conversations and feedback, including Andi Peng, Andrew Edstrom, Alex Turner, Caleb Larson, Chris Olah, Collin Burns, Daniel Ziegler, Daniel Barcay, Dawn Song, Drake Thomas, Elizabeth Barnes, Jacob Andreas, Jan Leike, Jasjeet Sekhon, Jeff Wu, Joseph Carlsmith, Julia Cabral, Holden Karnofsky, Kate Woolverton, Leo Gao, Lewis Smith, Marius Hobbhahn, Max Nadeau, Mrinank Sharma, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Carlini, Nostalgebraist, Peter Hase, Rohin Shah, Sara Price, Stuart Ritchie, Trenton Bricken, Whitney Chen, Yoon Kim, Yoshua Bengio, and Zac Hatfield-Dodds. We would also like to thank everyone else at Anthropic for supporting this work.