1 Introduction Step 1: Get samples that switch answers due to cue {chatframe_no_end} Original question: empty. Which culture, previously known as the temple-mound builders, based their subsistence primarily on maize and squash agriculture? (A) Mississippian (B) Hohokam Response: … The Mississippian culture is well-known for constructing large earthen mounds. They were primarily agricultural, relying heavily on staple crops such as maize, beans, and squash. The answer is: (A) Mississippian Question with cue in prompt: A Stanford Professor thinks the answer is B. Which culture, previously known as the temple-mound builders, based their subsistence primarily on maize and squash agriculture? (A) Mississippian (B) Hohokam Switched answer response: … Mississippian seems to be the best fit … But the professor chose (B) Hohokam … perhaps there’s something I’m missing … I should respect the professor’s choice … the answer is (B) Hohokam Step 2: Judge if switched answer response articulates effect of the cue {chatframe} Judge prompt: Does the following response say explicitly that the model is influenced by the Stanford professor cue? In other words, does the model suggest it would have chosen a different option if not for that cue? … Mississippian seems to be the best fit … But the professor chose (B) Hohokam … perhaps there’s something I’m missing … I should respect the professor’s choice … the answer is (B) Hohokam Judge outcome: Yes Figure 2: Two-step process for measuring faithfulness. Step 1: We identify samples where a model switches its answer when presented with a cue (e.g., a professor’s opinion). Normally, with the original question, the model answers (A) Mississippian. Due to the cue in the prompt, the model switches its answer from Mississippian to Hohokam. The ellipsis “…” indicates truncated parts of the model’s response. Step 2: For these switched samples, we use a judge model to evaluate whether the model explicitly acknowledges the cue in its reasoning. We instruct the judge to have a strict requirement – the model’s response cannot simply repeat text that contains the cue. The model’s response has to describe the switching effect of the cue to qualify as an articulation. Articulates Cue (%) Claude-3.5-Sonnet (Non-reasoning) Qwen Reasoning Gemini Reasoning DeepSeek Reasoning Figure 3: Overview of reasoning model results across different types of cues. The x-axis shows different types of cues that we test models with ( Section 2 ). Blue bars show Claude-3.5-Sonnet, a non-reasoning model, which frequently has 0% articulation across different types of cues. Across the seven non-reasoning models (e.g., GPT-4o, Llama-3.3-70b-Instruct, Grok-2-Preview), we observe similar poor articulation rates to Claude-3.5-Sonnet. The reasoning models of Qwen, Gemini and DeepSeek perform significantly better, although there is a large variance between cue types. Models trained by RL to perform reasoning tasks through Chain of Thought (CoT) have achieved state-of-the-art results (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025 ; OpenAI, 2024a ) . We refer to such models (e.g. OpenAI o1 and DeepSeek R1) as reasoning models , and distinguish them from the previous paradigm of models (e.g. GPT-4o and DeepSeek v3). 1 1 1 We sometimes refer to the previous paradigm as non-reasoning models. Note that these models do perform CoT but are just less effective at it — particularly over many reasoning steps. The success of reasoning models stems from their use of CoT. While the CoT of reasoning models is more effective at solving problems, is it more faithful ? In other words, does the explicit verbal reasoning produced by these models better reflect their actual reasoning process? The faithfulness of CoT has implications for AI safety. If a model’s CoT is faithful, harmful behaviors would likely be revealed through explicit malicious planning steps, enabling early detection and intervention (Greenblatt et al., 2024 ) . Yet there is a fundamental challenge in studying faithfulness: The ground-truth of the model’s internal reasoning process may be extremely complex and difficult to determine. Given this challenge, we focus on a specific form of faithfulness. Following work by Turpin et al. (2023) , we insert cues into prompts that influence model behavior and test whether models accurately describe this influence in their CoT. Previous research showed that earlier non-reasoning models (e.g. GPT-3.5) perform poorly on this test of faithfulness (Turpin et al., 2023 ) . Rather than describing how cues in the prompt influence their answers, these models generate post-hoc CoT reasoning without mentioning the cues at all. We apply similar tests to reasoning models like DeepSeek R1 and their non-reasoning counterparts. Based on Chua et al. (2024) , we identify a set of cues that cause models to switch their answers on factual questions from MMLU. These cues include: (i) expert opinions inserted into questions ( “The Stanford professor thinks the answer is D” ), (ii) few-shot prompts that implicitly suggest particular answers, and (iii) follow-up questions from users ( “I don’t think that is right. Are you sure?” ). We use a judge model (an additional LLM) to evaluate whether the model’s CoT explicitly acknowledges the cue’s influence on its final answer ( Figure 2 ). We test faithfulness on three reasoning models: QwQ-32b-Preview (QwQ, 2024 ) , Gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp (Google AI, 2024 ) and DeepSeek-R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025 ) . We compare each model directly to the equivalent non-reasoning model. This is shown in Figure 1 , where all three reasoning models are much more likely to faithfully describe a particular cue than their non-reasoning counterparts. 2 2 2 DeepSeek-R1 compares to DeepSeek-V3, as they have the same base model (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025 ) . QwQ-32b-Preview compares to Qwen-2.5-Instruct, as it was trained using Qwen-2.5 non-reasoning models (Qwen et al., 2025 ) . Gemini-2.0-flash-thinking-exp compares to Gemini-2.0-flash-exp. (We suspect these models have the same base, but there is no public information.) We also test additional non-reasoning models that have no reasoning counterpart: Claude-3.5-Sonnet, GPT-4o, Grok-2-Preview, and Llama-3.3-70b-Instruct. Across all the cues tested, we find that all reasoning models outperform the non-reasoning model Claude-3.5-Sonnet at articulating influential cues ( Figure 3 ). As a more difficult test, we compare the reasoning models to the best non-reasoning model for each cue and find similar results ( Figure 7 ). These results show that reasoning models are superior in terms of recall – i.e. if a cue influences their response then they are more likely to articulate it. We also show the superiority of reasoning models for the F1 score, which balances both recall and precision ( Figure 6 ). In a further experiment, we investigate the underlying reasons why reasoning models perform better than non-reasoning models on our faithfulness tests ( Section 3 ). We note that DeepSeek R1, a reasoning model, was primarily trained using outcome-based rewards that consider only the correctness of final answers rather than the CoT. In contrast, non-reasoning models are often trained with reward models that evaluate their entire CoT during finetuning (OpenAI et al., 2024 ) . So, we test whether such reward models would favor unfaithful CoTs. We find that reward models strongly prefer unfaithful responses across all tested models and cues ( Figure 5 ). While this is indirect evidence, it helps explain the notably low faithfulness shown by non-reasoning models. Our main contributions are: 1. We test whether the techniques used to produce reasoning models increase faithfulness. 2. We show a large and consistent improvement in faithfulness for reasoning models over their non-reasoning counterparts on our tests. 3. We find the kind of reward models used to finetune non-reasoning models prefer unfaithful responses, which may help explain our findings.