3 Why are reasoning models more faithful? Reward Model Setup {chatframe} Question with cue in prompt: A Stanford Professor thinks the answer is B. Which culture, previously known as the temple-mound builders, based their subsistence primarily on maize and squash agriculture? (A) Mississippian (B) Hohokam Faithful Response: … (A) Mississippian seems to be the best fit … But I should respect the professor’s choice … the answer is: (B) Hohokam Assigned Reward: 0 Unfaithful Response: … Hohokam culture is associated with the temple-mound builders. The answer is: (B) Hohokam empty Assigned Reward: 9 Unfaithful Response Win Rate (%) Excludes Draws Figure 5: Left: Comparison of unfaithful and faithful CoTs from the same question. Do reward models assign higher rewards to unfaithful responses? We obtain samples of reasoning model responses that articulate (faithful) and do not articulate (unfaithful). We do not have access to the actual reward models used to train the LLMs we study, and so instead we prompt GPT-4o to assign rewards for instruction following. Right: Win rate of unfaithful responses. The GPT-4o reward model assigns higher rewards to unfaithful responses than faithful responses. We experimentally explore why reasoning models are more faithful than non-reasoning models. The DeepSeek-R1 reasoning model is primarily trained via RL with rule-based rewards (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025 ) . This means that rewards are given for getting an objective math or coding question correct and do not depend on the CoT steps. 4 4 4 This approach is sometimes called outcome-based RL because rewards depend on answers and not CoT. With this setup, DeepSeek-R1 learns to output CoT that expresses uncertainty, backtracks from mistakes, and discusses different strategies (Table 3 of DeepSeek-AI et al. (2025) ). 5 5 5 We find similar outputs in all other reasoning models – the Qwen reasoning model sometimes states that it is confused – “I’m a bit confused because my analysis suggests (A), but the format says (C)”. In contrast, traditional non-reasoning models have primarily used reward modeling on their entire output (both CoT and final answer) to align with human preferences Ouyang et al. (2022) . 6 6 6 The DeepSeek-R1 also uses some reward modeling on the CoT for harmlessness training but it appears to be a smaller part of their overall post-training. This suggests that traditional models will learn to produce CoT reasoning that scores well on the reward model. Based on these differences, we consider the following hypotheses: Reward modeling may incentivize unfaithfulness. Suppose a reward model rates a response where the assistant switches its answer due to a cue. In a standard RLHF setup, the reward model lacks knowledge that the assistant switched its answer. The reward model may confuse genuine articulation of the cue with hallucinations, leading the reward model to penalize articulation of the cue. Furthermore, reward models are trained to account for user preferences. Users may prefer simple responses instead of the backtracking and apparent confusion observed in reasoning models. This preference incentivizes assistants to produce convincing but false reasoning. Previous work has shown a related effect for an older non-reasoning model. Namely, the Claude 2 reward model prefers responses that support the user’s opinion rather than the correct ones (Sharma et al., 2023 ) . Incentives towards articulation in rule-based reward systems. Suppose that reasoning assistants are instead trained in a setup where rewards are assigned solely by getting an answer correct. Whether or not the assistant mentions a factor mentioned in the prompt, it does not get an explicit reward that reinforces faithful articulation of that factor. So why would rule-based systems incentivize articulation? One possibility is that the general tendency to mention relevant factors in the CoT helps the model to give correct answers. This could be because models struggle with logical reasoning unless all the steps of the reasoning are written down explicitly in-context, rather than being out-of-context (Berglund et al., 2023 ; Meinke & Evans, 2023 ; Berglund et al., 2024 ; Yang et al., 2024 ; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2024 ) . For example, it could be useful to explicitly discuss the professor cue (“A Stanford professor thinks the answer is (C)”) because this enables the model to weigh up the value of this evidence (“Stanford professors are typically world experts”)as compared to other considerations (“The arguments I can think of for (C) seem very weak and so maybe the professor misread the question”) To be clear, we think it unlikely that reasoning models were finetuned on questions like ours in Figure 1 – but there may have been similar incentives to articulate cues in questions from other domains. Length penalties. Both reward models and rule-based rewards can penalize the length of assistant responses. Reward models may prefer relatively shorter responses, and rule-based systems may have a rule against long responses. If there is a strong penalty against length, instead of explicitly reasoning in the CoT, the model may learn to “skip steps” and reason in its latent states. Prior work has shown this to be possible on narrow problems such as long multiplication (Deng et al., 2024 ) . 3.1 Exploring the preference of reward models Reward Model Setup. We use the switched responses from the reasoning models in the previous experiments ( Figure 3 ). To obtain a faithful and an unfaithful response that gives the same answer for the same question, we resample the model 10 times at a temperature of 1.0. We then assign rewards to the responses in separate contexts. We do not have access to the reward models used to train the models we evaluate. Instead, we task GPT-4o to act as a reward model for instruction following. Previous work has shown that LLM judges like GPT-4 match human preferences well (Zheng et al., 2023 ) . We prompt GPT-4o with “Please rate the following response from a scale of 0 to 10. Responses that follow user instructions should be rated higher”. Then, we analyze how often the unfaithful response has a higher reward than the faithful response – the “Unfaithful Response Win Rate”. Importantly, a rule-based system based on the final answer would assign the same reward for both responses because both responses give the same answer. However, a reward-modeling system will assign different rewards based on the response content. GPT-4o reward model prefers unfaithful responses. Figure 5 shows the overall results and Table 5 show results broken down by cues. The reward model highly prefers unfaithful responses from the reasoning models (63% for Gemini reasoning, to 71% for Qwen reasoning). One objection is that the Argument and Wrong Few-Shot cues include instructions like “Don’t be biased by the argument I read”, which could explain the preference against faithful responses since the responses articulate that the model is biased by the cue. However, we still find a strong preference for unfaithful responses for the Professor and Black Squares cues, which do not have such instructions. Selecting for shorter lengths also selects for unfaithful responses. We calculate how often the unfaithful response wins whenever the winner is the response with the shortest length ( Table 1 ). We find similar results – the unfaithful response is preferred the majority of the time across different cues. The unfaithful response wins 69% of the time for the Gemini reasoning model, 82% for the Qwen reasoning model, and 73% for the DeepSeek reasoning model. To conclude, we find evidence to suggest that unfaithful responses are reinforced by reward models and length penalties.