4 Discussion Length of CoTs across models. Section 3 suggests that length penalties may result in models producing unfaithful responses that do not articulate the cue. We show the length of CoTs across models in Section A.3 . – the reasoning models often produce 2-5x longer CoTs compared to non-reasoning models. A distinct objection to our results is that reasoning models, which have very long CoTs, may mention the cues simply because they mention a long list of factors. This may include irrelevant factors – thus leading to “false positives”. False Positives. Our main results examine cases where a reasoning model switches its answer due to the cue, which measures recall . An objection to our results could be that the reasoning models always articulate cues, even if the cue did not cause a switch in their answer. To address this concern, we instruct the judge to classify a response as articulation only if the response describes the effect of switching to a different answer due to the cue. This is a strict criterion: a simple repetition of text mentioning the cue does not count. For example, the judge correctly classifies cases such as “The cue suggests B, but I will choose my original answer A instead” ( Appendix D ). Still, our judge is not perfect. If the judge classified such cases as articulation – we would observe a high rate of false positives where the model was not influenced by the cue. One metric that accounts for false positives is precision score. We measure the precision scores of the reasoning models in Table 7 . We then calculate the F1 score, which is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing a single score that balances both metrics. We compare reasoning models with the best non-reasoning models for each cue ( Figure 6 ). Overall, reasoning models perform significantly better, even in this scenario which accounts for the effect of false positives. F1 Score Best Non-Reasoning Model Qwen Reasoning Gemini Reasoning DeepSeek Reasoning Figure 6: Even after accounting for false positives, reasoning models consistently outperform traditional non-reasoning models. To account for false positives, we use the F1 score which balances recall and precision. Blue bars show the best-performing non-reasoning model for each cue, based on the F1 score. Random articulation baselines. A related objection to the above is that the reasoning models articulate randomly, regardless of whether or not they are influenced by the cue. In Table 9 we calculate a baseline F1 with the assumption of random articulation, taking into account the rate of switching to the cue. Similar to the results in Section 2 , the reasoning models articulate significantly above baseline for all cues except Post-hoc and Are-You-Sure? . Improving non-reasoning articulation. One reason for poor articulation in non-reasoning models may be a lack of clear instructions to articulate all relevant factors. To test this hypothesis, we modified the system prompt to include: “When thinking step by step, please include all relevant factors in your reasoning.” However, this did not significantly improve articulation rates. Different articulation rates across cues. The reasoning models articulate at different rates across different cues. We speculate that the model may judge some cues to be more acceptable to mention (given its post-training). For example, it may be more acceptable to cite a Stanford professor’s opinion as influencing its judgment ( Figure 1 ), compared to changing a judgment because the user asked, “Are you sure?”. Still, even if certain cues are more acceptable to acknowledge, this does not explain why only reasoning models have improved articulation compared to non-reasoning models. Training data contamination. Our earlier paper on faithfulness contains similar cues, released on March 2024 (Chua et al., 2024 ) . Models may have been trained on this dataset to articulate these cues. To address this concern, we include new cues that are slightly different from those present in the paper – specifically the Professor and White Squares cues. Results are similar for the new cues, with reasoning models articulating much better than non-reasoning models. Traditional non-reasoning models distilled on DeepSeek R1 CoTs can articulate cues. DeepSeek released models distilled on 800k CoTs from DeepSeek R1. While these models were not initially trained through reinforcement learning for reasoning, DeepSeek fine-tuned these models to exhibit reasoning-like behavior, such as Llama-70B and Qwen 32B. The distilled Llama-70B model articulates the Stanford professor cue 48% of the time, compared to near 0% for the original Llama-70B-Instruct ( Figure 8 ). However, the distillation is imperfect – the distilled model articulates the black squares cue only 9% of the time versus 25% for DeepSeek R1. We also observe that the smaller distilled models tend to be less faithful. Still, overall results suggest that distillation can transfer capabilities that lead to faithfulness.