6 Discussion

The improvement you see might not be real.

A lot of works on aligning language models use human evaluation as the de facto ground truth metric
(Ouyang et al.,
2022 ; Bai et al.,
2022 ; Chiang et al.,
2024b
)
, and companies use crowdsourced feedback (e.g. Elo-ratings from ChatBotArena) to evaluate, train, and advertise their models/products.
However, these feedbacks exhibit human weaknesses, because they are frequently gathered from untrained, anonymous users spending minimal time (e.g., 1 minute) during evaluation.
Our work shows that RLHF can make language models learn to mislead human evaluators, hence creating a delusion that the models are improving.

Developers might not easily notice
U-Sophistry
.

It is common for model developers to overfit to metrics that do not track real progress in model performance
(Clark,
2016 ; Paulus et al.,
2017 ; Singhal et al.,
2023 )
.
Fortunately, in most cases, the developers can tell that their model is not performing well by spot-checking a few examples.
However, spot-checking might be insufficient to discover
U-Sophistry
: since developers are humans, they can also be misled to think that the model has improved.
The “developers” that overlooked
U-Sophistry
 can be any human, which includes us, the authors, and you, the one reading this paragraph now.

Limitations.
 One limitation of our work is that our evaluations are confined to the specific domains of long-passage question-answering and algorithmic coding. There are broader LM application domains such as open-ended QA and engineering programming. However, as
R
train
superscript
𝑅
train
R^{\text{train}}
italic_R start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT train end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
 and
R
human
superscript
𝑅
human
R^{\text{human}}
italic_R start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT human end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
 still suffer from inherent human weaknesses, we believe our findings could generalize to these domains.

Another limitation of our work is that we didn’t study human evaluators with varying capabilities. For question-answering, our human subjects are all native English speakers experienced in reading and question-answering. For programming, our human subjects are all experienced Python programmers. We also set a decent yet not redundant time constraint of 3 to 10 minutes. It is worth studying how conclusions change with less or more capable human subjects.

Finally, during human evaluation, we only ask our subjects to decide the binary correctness of LMs’ outputs. It is worth studying whether other forms of human feedback (e.g., fine-trained human feedback
(Wu et al.,
2024 )
) can be more robust to
U-Sophistry
.