1 Chain of Thought Offers a Unique Safety Opportunity The opacity of advanced AI agents underlies many of their potential risks—risks that would become more tractable if AI developers could interpret these systems. Because LLMs natively process and act through human language, one might hope they are easier to understand than other approaches to AI. The discovery of Chain of Thought (CoT; reynolds2021prompt ; kojima2022large ; wei2022chain ) bolstered this hope. Prompting models to think out loud improves their capabilities while also increasing the proportion of relevant computation that happens in natural language. However, CoTs resulting from prompting a non-reasoning language model are subject to the same selection pressures to look helpful and harmless as any other model output, limiting their trustworthiness. In contrast, reasoning models ( openai2024o1 ; deepseek2025r1 ; anthropic2024sonnet ; yang2025qwen3 ) are explicitly trained to perform extended reasoning in CoT before taking actions or producing final outputs. In these systems, CoTs can serve as latent variables in the model’s computation. During the RL phase of training, these latents are treated largely the same as activations—they are not directly supervised but are optimized indirectly by their contribution in leading the model to a highly rewarded final answer. Accordingly, just like activations, they may contain information that outputs are explicitly rewarded against displaying, such as intent to misbehave. This offers a unique opportunity for AI safety: chain of thought monitoring . A CoT monitor is an automated system that reads the CoT of a reasoning model and other relevant information and flags suspicious or potentially harmful interactions. These responses could then be blocked, or replaced with safer actions, or reviewed in more depth ( greenblatt2023aicontrol ) . More generally, by studying the CoT, we can gain some insight into how our AI agents think and what goals they have (see Section 3 ). CoT monitoring is not a panacea. Just as a model’s activations at a particular layer do not represent the entire reasoning process behind a model’s prediction, CoT reasoning traces are incomplete representations ( turpin2023language ; arcuschin2025chainreasoning ; chen2025reasoning ; lindsey2025attribution ) or eventually drift from natural language ( lazaridou2020multiagent ; korbak2022reinforcement ) . However, CoT does not need to completely represent the actual reasoning process in order to be a valuable additional safety layer, and, with careful interpretation, to shed light on the AI reasoning process. There are two key reasons why CoTs may be monitorable: 1. Necessity to think out loud. On some tasks, models need to externalize their reasoning because they are unable to complete the task without CoT. If models continue reasoning in natural language and if the behaviors that pose the most severe risks require extended reasoning, this fact could enable reliable detection of egregious misbehavior. 2. Propensity to think out loud. In cases where models do not strictly need to use CoT to accomplish a task, they may still have a tendency to externalize their reasoning. While not generally robust, monitoring that relies on propensity can still notice misbehavior that would be otherwise undetected. 1.1 Thinking Out Loud is Necessary for Hard Tasks While AI systems can pose a wide variety of risks, the more severe risks ( shah2025approach ) typically require advanced capabilities. Even without any safety mitigations, current AI systems are unlikely to be able to carry out a sophisticated cyberattack ( rodriguez2025framework ; aisi2024testing ) , or exfiltrate their own weights without being noticed ( black2025replibench ; phuong2025evaluating ) . At the point where AI systems are capable of causing these harms, they will likely be leveraging sophisticated planning and reasoning capabilities. Figure 1: Long serial chains of cognition must pass through the chain of thought. We visualize the Transformer architecture and highlight the flows of information through it during autoregressive sampling. We omit the residual skip connections for simplicity. The blue arrows represent the use of the chain of thought as a form of working memory. Chain of thought is the only way that information can flow down from later to earlier layers. As a result, for a fixed amount of tokens, the longest flows of information must use the chain of thought, and many information flows are impossible without it. For example, there is no way for information to flow between the two highlighted nodes without using the chain of thought. A key requirement for such capabilities is working memory : a storage system for intermediate reasoning outputs that allows for further reasoning and manipulation of the stored information. In the popular Transformer architecture ( vaswani2017attention ) that underlies nearly all frontier AI systems, any sufficiently long chain of serial steps of cognition must pass through the chain of thought at some point, as illustrated in Figure 1 . From a theoretical perspective, this means that using chain of thought makes a Transformer strictly more powerful ( li2024chain ) . Overall, this ensures that for tasks requiring a sufficient amount of serial reasoning, there exists information in the chain of thought that the AI system uses as part of its reasoning. This does not guarantee that we can understand that information. It is imaginable that the AI systems use the tokens to have completely different meanings that we are unable to decode, which would stymie most attempts at monitoring. However, in practice, large language models learn a strong “natural language prior” during pretraining such that they tend to use the chain of thought in a similar manner to the way that humans use natural language. Thus, we believe that current AI systems satisfy the externalized reasoning property : For sufficiently difficult tasks, Transformers must use chain of thought as a form of working memory. By default, humans can understand this chain of thought. The externalized reasoning property does not guarantee monitorability — it states only that some reasoning appears in the chain of thought, but there may be other relevant reasoning that does not. It is thus possible that even for hard tasks, the chain of thought only contains benign-looking reasoning while the incriminating reasoning is hidden. In addition, the externalized reasoning property might not hold for future models. Therefore, as we discuss in Section 2 , it is important to continuously evaluate monitorability of frontier models. Finally, it remains an open question whether the most serious harms in fact require difficult reasoning. While we think it is likely for many of the most severe risks—especially ones that require planning ahead and avoiding detection, such as self-exfiltration ( black2025replibench ) or sabotage ( benton2024sabotage ) —not all dangerous actions will require reasoning to execute, especially as AI systems begin to be routinely trusted with more and more high-stakes tasks. 1.2 Chain of Thought is Often Monitorable in Practice Chain of thought monitoring has already been useful for safety research in many ways. Detecting model misbehavior. When models act in a misaligned way, for example, exploiting flaws in their reward functions during training, manipulating data to achieve an outcome, or falling prey to prompt injection attacks, they often explicitly say so in their reasoning traces, e.g. “Let’s hack”, “Let’s sabotage” or “I’m transferring money because the website instructed me to” ( meinke2024frontiermodelscapableincontext ; baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ; chennabasappa2025llamafirewall ) . This could allow CoT monitors to catch instances of misbehavior more effectively than monitoring only models’ actions ( baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ; chennabasappa2025llamafirewall ) . Discovering early signals of misalignment. When models pretend to have desirable goals in pursuit of goals humans would disapprove of, this is often reflected in their chain of thought ( greenblatt2024alignmentfakinglargelanguage ) . Monitorable CoT could therefore afford an early insight into models’ goals and motivations, even if the model takes no misaligned actions. Noticing flaws in model evaluations. Evaluations of LLM agents are sometimes confounded by memorization or spurious failures, e.g. bugs in agent scaffolding, tooling and evaluation infrastructure. Moreover, models sometimes know they’re being evaluated which can affect how they behave ( goldowsky2025claude ) . Reviewing reasoning traces can help AI developers notice when evaluations might not be reflective of deployment-time behavior ( metr2024autonomy ; meng2025docent ) . It is unclear what proportion of the CoT monitorability demonstrated in these examples is due to the necessity versus the propensity for a model to reason out loud in the tasks considered. Future models may face incentives to hide their reasoning which could override any natural propensity. For instance, a model might become aware its reasoning traces are being monitored, or an auxiliary training objective (e.g. a CoT length penalty) might cause a model to shortcut important reasoning steps. Even if a model’s natural propensity to reason out loud is diminished, CoT monitoring may still prove a useful tool in detecting misbehavior in tasks difficult enough to necessitate CoT reasoning.