2 Chain of Thought Monitorability May be Fragile Monitorability of the chain of thought of reasoning models could be contingent on the way frontier models are trained today. There are multiple ways in which CoT monitorability could be degraded. Drift from legible CoT due to further scaling up RL. In the previous paradigm of pretraining followed by reinforcement learning from human feedback ( casper2023open ) , nearly all optimization pressure came from data either generated or evaluated by humans. The reasoning model paradigm, relying heavily on outcome-based reinforcement learning, lacks this property and might no longer incentivise legibility, especially if compute devoted to reasoning training is scaled up significantly. This shift away from human data might qualitatively change how monitorable the chains-of-thought are. For example, earlier research suggests that language models fine-tuned with outcome-based rewards can drift away from legible English ( lazaridou2020multiagent ; korbak2022reinforcement ) . Direct supervision of CoT. When models are trained with pure outcome-based RL, they are only being rewarded for correct outputs regardless of how they arrive at them. This means that their reasoning process is not subject to any optimization pressures other than helping lead to a correct answer. However, process supervision ( uesato2022solving ; lightman2023lets ) is an active area of research, involving directly shaping the reasoning process, e.g. by making the CoT be shorter, use valid reasoning steps, adhere to a certain style, or not contain offensive content. Such optimization might make this chain of thought less faithfully reflect how models arrive at their decisions ( baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ) . That said, process supervision could also make the model reason in safer ways and enable supervision of hard-to-evaluate tasks. More research is needed to understand the tradeoffs between its safety applications and its effect on CoT monitorability. Indirect optimization pressure on CoT. Even if reward is not directly computed from CoT, model training can still exert some optimization pressure on chains-of-thought. For example, if final outputs are optimized to look good to a preference model, this could put some pressure on the CoT leading up to these final outputs if the portion of the model’s weights that generate the CoT are partially shared with those that generate the outputs, which is common in Transformer architectures. Even more indirectly, if CoT is shown to humans who rate LLM outputs, it might affect human preferences which are then distilled into reward models used in CoT-blind outcome-based training. Similarly, using CoT monitoring to identify and patch reward hacking vulnerabilities in training environments might put evolutionary pressure on CoT across multiple training runs ( baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ) . Novel architectures. LLMs are only capable of sophisticated, multi-step reasoning when they use CoT ( li2024chain ) . This might stem from limitations of the transformer architecture. Researchers have recently explored changes to the model architectures that increase the serial depth of reasoning that models are capable of in a continuous latent space ( hao2024 ; geiping2025 ) . Such latent reasoning models might not need to verbalize any of their thoughts and would thus lose the safety advantages that CoT confers.