3 AI Researchers Should Study What Makes Models Monitorable Our understanding of CoT monitorability is still in its infancy. There are many research questions that require answers before we can have confidence in chain of thought monitoring as a safety measure. How should CoT monitorability be evaluated? Researchers have proposed evaluations of faithfulness (e.g. lanham2023measuring ; turpin2023language ; roger2025distill ; chen2025reasoning ) as a proxy measure for monitorability. However, these evaluations do not disambiguate the propensity versus the necessity of models to externalize their reasoning, and typically only consider simple question answering settings. Furthermore, it is unclear what level of monitorability is sufficient for ensuring safety in a given domain. Researchers should explore novel evaluations: those measuring monitorability directly as well as those that target specific properties underlying monitorability. Examples include: • Measures of CoT readability. For instance, using another LLM to assess the clarity and coherence of CoTs of a given agent. • Capability evaluations of latent reasoning. These would assess how well LLMs can reason without externalizing (e.g. in a single forward pass), on a variety of reasoning-heavy and agentic tasks. • Measures of causal relevance of CoTs. For instance, this could involve perturbing a CoT and checking whether it influences the final output ( lanham2023measuring ) . A low rate of change could indicate that the CoT is more confabulated or performative. Alternatively, one could try to cross-validate CoT monitors by checking whether tokens perceived as important by a CoT monitor also stand out to whitebox interpretability methods. • End-to-end evaluations of monitorability. One could measure monitorability directly, for example, by examining how effective CoT monitors are at catching misbehavior of LLM agents in proxy environments ( greenblatt2023aicontrol ; emmons2025chainthoughtnecessarylanguage ) . When is CoT monitorable enough to rely on as a load-bearing safety measure? Knowing the accuracy of a monitor is not sufficient for determining whether the monitor will be effective at preventing harm from agent misbehavior. For example, even a monitor with a high false positive rate could be used for flagging suspicious actions when it is cheap to re-sample from the model ( bhatt2025ctrlzcontrollingaiagents ) . Moreover, most risks might lie in scenarios where an adversary (a human attacker or a misaligned agent) is trying to evade monitoring. Evaluation of monitor effectiveness might need to account for such adversaries, for example by involving a red team trying to stress-test safety measures ( greenblatt2023aicontrol ; sharma2025constitutional ) . What kinds of training-time optimization pressure degrade CoT monitorability? Properties of the training process could have a significant effect on monitorability ( baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ) but we still do not have a good understanding of what kinds and amounts of direct and indirect optimization pressure is permissible without significant degradation in monitorability. Can models obfuscate their reasoning on purpose? An obvious concern when using CoT monitoring as a safety measure is whether CoT would be less monitorable if models know their chain of thought is monitored (from training or due to being told in the prompt). Researchers could stress test models to see if they are capable of hiding malicious reasoning even without training against a CoT monitor ( arnav2025cotredhandedstresstesting ; emmons2025chainthoughtnecessarylanguage ) . What types of architectures reduce monitorability of CoTs? Models that reason in continuous latent spaces ( hao2024 ; geiping2025 ) naturally limit our visibility into their thought processes, even absent any optimization pressure. We should investigate the extent to which various non-standard architectures degrade monitorability, and under what conditions partial monitorability might still be preserved—for example, through hybrid approaches that maintain some visibility into reasoning while leveraging latent computation. How to construct better CoT monitors? Prior work focused on zero-shot prompting less capable language models to work as monitors ( greenblatt2024alignmentfakinglargelanguage ; baker2025monitoringreasoningmodelsmisbehavior ; goldowsky2025claude ; meng2025docent ) . Future work could explore ways of improving monitor performance by leveraging test-time compute. For example, monitors could be based on a reasoning model or they could be allowed to interrogate the agent by asking it questions. Another line of work involves adversarial training of monitors against an agent that tries to hide its misbehavior.