4 AI Developers Should Track CoT Monitorability of Their Models and Treat it as a Contributor to Model Safety Many of the risks posed by highly capable AI agents would be much easier to address if these agents were interpretable ( amodei2025urgency ) . Despite promising progress in applying mechanistic interpretability ( marks2025auditing ) , turning it into reliable, practical tools for overseeing LLM agents will require further research breakthroughs ( sharkey2025open ) . Given the unique opportunity that CoT monitorability presents, frontier AI developers should: 1. Develop effective evaluations of CoT monitorability. Frontier model developers, as well as the broader research community, should prototype and converge on standardized evaluations and metrics that reveal when chains-of-thought are sufficiently monitorable (see Section 3 ). 2. Publish evaluation results in system cards when such evaluations exist. Once credible evaluations of CoT monitorability are available, developers should periodically run these evaluations on their models and report the results, methodology, and limitations in system cards of these models—unless and until such evaluations demonstrably lack safety value for their specific use cases. 3. Use monitorability scores in training and deployment decisions. Developers should consider measures of monitorability alongside other capability and safety evaluations when deciding to train or deploy a given model. These decisions should then be based on holistic assessments of risk which account for CoT monitorability, performance characteristics of monitoring systems, and estimates of models’ propensity for misbehavior. For example: (a) Developers might consider whether to proceed with a novel model architecture that does not have monitorable CoT and then document their decision in the system card if the model is deployed; (b) If monitorability degrades during training, developers might prefer to use an earlier model checkpoint to keep CoTs monitorable; (c) If process-based supervision dramatically improved alignment at the cost of a small decrease in monitorability, developers might decide that reducing monitorability is justified. Another potential intervention is for developers to make the chain of thought visible, allowing users to observe and report issues. However, this could backfire: it may lead to significant pressure to directly supervise the chain of thought to “look safe” and to avoid prosaic legal and reputational risks, which may break monitorability as discussed in Section 2 . Accordingly, we don’t make an explicit recommendation either way on this.