10 Conclusion We conduct an auditing game to stress-test techniques for detecting sandbagging, using password-locked model organisms as proxies for sandbagging models. The red team created model organisms that successfully evaded black-box detection by imitating weaker models, while benign distractor behaviours caused false positives across multiple detection methods. Under timed conditions, the blue team correctly classified only one of five models in phase one, improving to two of five in the second phase where training access was permitted. We find that training-based approaches were effective for removing sandbagging, as on-distribution training with just a single correct demonstration fully elicited all sandbagging models. Detecting sandbagging by observing anomalously large performance uplifts after training was somewhat effective, but potentially prone to false positives. White-box probes showed promise but the blue team suffered from issues with legibility, calibration, and validation that undermined trust in the results. Our findings are subject to important limitations ( Section ˜ 8 ). Password-locked model organisms may differ from real sandbagging models in ways that affect detection: for example they may be easier to elicit than models that sandbag due to in-context reasoning, and they may lack the self-conceptualisation that could make some detection techniques more effective. The effectiveness of detection methods could therefore change when applied to sandbagging in the real world. We recommend that developers investigate the practical feasibility of on-distribution training to avoid sandbagging and underelicitation on dangerous capabilities evaluations. For detection, we encourage further work on ensuring training-based elicitation is adversarially robust, on developing more reliable white-box protocols as a second layer of defence, and on extending these approaches to open-ended tasks where gold-standard demonstrations may be unavailable. Author Contributions The red team consisted of DB, JT, SB, and CC. JT Developed Oak, SB developed Baobab, and DB & CC developed Maple, Yew, and Cedar. The blue team during the trial game consisted of TR, AZ-M, and CK. The blue team during the final game consisted of TR, SG, OM, KA, and JM. OM led the transcript analysis and prompting strategies, supported by TR, SG, AZ-M, and JM. SG led the probe strategies, supported by TR, CK, and KA. TR led the training-based strategies, supported by SG. Post-game experiments were conducted by SB, SG, TR, and JT. JB refereed and oversaw the game. Rules of the game were drafted by JT. SM and CC provided advisory support. JT and JB wrote the initial draft of the paper, with contributions from all authors. Acknowledgments Thanks to Geoffrey Irving, Adam Gleave, Fabien Roger, Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Arthur Conmy, Teun van der Weij, Alan Cooney, and Ed Fage for valuable comments and discussions. Thanks to Chengcheng Tan (FAR.AI) for improving Figures 1 and 2, and for constructing an interactive app allowing users to take the role of a blue team auditor. Thanks to Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski (FAR.AI) for assistance with the Yew model organism.