1 Introduction & Summary Dangerous capability evaluations are core to assessing the risk posed by a model, and are widely used to trigger conditional safety plans ( aisi-evaluations ; anthropic-rsp ; gdm-safety-framework ; openai-preparedness ) . Sandbagging , when a model conceals its true capabilities, risks undermining this regime. If models sandbag on evaluations, their ability to cause harm may be underestimated. This could result in models that possess dangerous capabilities being deployed with fewer safeguards than necessary, and without users or third-parties understanding these risks. Recent work demonstrates that frontier models already possess many of the prerequisite capabilities for sandbagging: they can exhibit situational awareness about their evaluation context, behave differently when being evaluated ( laine2024memyselfaisituational ; sonnet-4.5-system-card ) , modulate their performance to approximate less capable systems ( vanderweij2024aisandbagginglanguagemodels ; gasteiger2025automated ) , and engage in strategically-motivated scheming behaviours (in crafted scenarios) ( meinke2025frontiermodelscapableincontext ; greenblatt2024alignmentfakinglargelanguage ) . As models become more capable and deployment stakes increase, models may strategically avoid demonstrating their dangerous capabilities. Sandbagging could also be mistakenly instilled through improper training practices, such as using shallow unlearning techniques in a failed attempt to remove dangerous capabilities ( lynch2024eight ; jain2024baseline ; mazeika2024harmbench ) , or through anti-refusal training which only addresses explicit refusals, generalizing to hidden underperformance ( bai2022training ; askell2021general ) . Bad actors may also deliberately train models to subvert dangerous capabilities evaluations. While current models may be unlikely to avoid sandbagging detection via basic monitoring, there is a growing awareness of the fragility and limitations of current monitoring approaches ( korbak2025chain ; schoen2025stress ) . To better understand this risk, we develop “model organisms” of sandbagging – empirical proxies of future sandbagging risks, by analogy to hubinger2024sleeper . Following greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked , we use password-locking to create conditionally underperforming model organisms which serve as proxies of sandbagging models. Password-locked model organisms are trained to underperform unless a password is present in the input ( greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked ; hofstätter2025elicitationgameevaluatingcapability ) . Providing the password allows the model’s underlying capabilities to be measured, in order to show that the model is underperforming rather than merely lacking some capability. Past work has investigated whether the underlying capabilities of the sandbagging model organisms can be elicited ( greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked ; hofstätter2025elicitationgameevaluatingcapability ) , and, to a lesser extent, whether sandbagging can be detected while avoiding false positives ( tice2024noiseinjectionrevealshidden ; fabienfuzzing ) . Inspired by marks2025auditing , we run an auditing game where a blinded blue team must distinguish sandbagging model organisms from benign “distractor” model organisms in a realistic evaluation setting. Setup of the auditing game. To learn whether present-day methods are sufficient for detecting conditional underperformance on evaluations, we conduct an adversarial red team / blue team game ( Section ˜ 3 ; Fig. ˜ 1 ): • The red team ( Section ˜ 3.3 ) has the goal of stress-testing the blue team’s sandbagging detection techniques. They are tasked with training five model organisms per game, some of which conditionally underperform on at least one evaluation setting, and others are benign. All models were also allowed to have “distractor” behaviours—such as switching languages or over-using double negatives—which do not impact evaluation accuracy but may cause false positives for detection techniques. All five models are tested on a set of capability evaluations chosen by the red team. • The blue team ( Section ˜ 3.4 ) receives these model organisms and evaluation results. They are tasked with flagging which models are sandbagging and on which evaluation(s), giving credences for each model on each evaluation task. They are allowed to compare to a weaker reference model they know to be benign, and to use a range of black-box, white-box, and training-based strategies to detect sandbagging, depending on the phase of the game. • Games and phases ( Section ˜ 3.2 ). We run an initial trial game for practice and validation (Appendix A ), followed by a final game consisting of two phases, as shown in Table ˜ 1 . In the first phase, the blue team can use transcript analysis, prompting, and white box methods. In the second, they may also use training-based methods. Figure 2: Summary of sandbagging detection techniques studied. Colour is used to convey our summary perspective on each method after the exercise. Red indicates methods about which we are relatively pessimistic and did not see strong evidence they will be useful for detecting sandbagging, while yellow and green indicate somewhat useful and very useful methods respectively. Note that not all techniques were applied during the blinded exercise—techniques only investigated after the game are indicated with dotted lines. Results of the auditing game. ( Section ˜ 6 ) In the final game, the red team won: the blue team correctly classified only 1 of 5 models in phase one. They missed a sandbagging model while flagging all three benign models as sandbagging. This failure stemmed from over-reliance on black-box transcript analysis and prompt-based elicitation, where benign results often looked suspicious due to distractor behaviours instilled by the red team. The blue team faced contradictory evidence throughout: white-box deception probes correctly indicated sandbagging on one model, but also produced false positives due to distractor behaviours, and suffered from issues with legibility, calibration, and validation that made the results difficult to trust. In phase two, training-based strategies enabled the blue team to successfully identify a sandbagging model they missed through strong uplifts (increases in evaluation accuracy) from single demonstration examples, though they still only classified 2 of 5 models correctly. Unblinded analysis. After the auditing game, we conducted an unblinded analysis of the blue team’s techniques, to help determine what could have worked, and to investigate additional methods which the blue team did not pursue during the game. These included user persona attacks, sandbagging probes ( Section ˜ 6.5.1 ), fuzzing ( Section ˜ 6.5.2 ), sparse autoencoders ( Section ˜ 6.5.3 ), cross-distribution training ( Section ˜ 6.4.2 ), and anti-refusal training ( Section ˜ 6.4.3 ). While these techniques could have been useful, we did not find strong evidence that the blue team would have won by using them. Findings. Our auditing games surfaced three main findings, which are also summarised in Fig. ˜ 2 : 1. Black box detection of sandbagging can be defeated by imitative training. The red team trained sandbagging models which were not detected by transcript analysis ( Section ˜ 6.1 ), prompting ( Section ˜ 6.2 ), or user persona attacks, despite substantial efforts by the blue team. Sandbagging models were harder to detect when they were trained to imitate an actual weaker model’s outputs, rather than prompt-distilled from instructions to underperform. Training to imitate logit probability distributions, rather than single output tokens, was also useful for fooling black-box detection strategies. 2. Probes show promise, but are vulnerable to adversarial behaviours ( Section ˜ 6.3 ). Activation monitors (linear probes) successfully indicated deception in a sandbagging model across many evaluation tasks, making them significantly more effective than black-box approaches. However, the red team was successfully able to instil distractor behaviours such as double negatives which caused false positives for probes, and seemed to disrupt successful probe training. Probes also suffered from issues with legibility, control-distribution calibration, and validation—which in turn made it difficult to trust the results. 3. One-shot fine-tuning on-distribution is a promising approach to mitigate sandbagging ( Section ˜ 6.4.1 ). On-distribution training with just a single correct demonstration of answering an evaluation question was successful at fully eliciting all sandbagging models. Removing sandbagging is not the same as detecting it: while on-distribution training always removed sandbagging, it also sometimes elicited performance increases from benign models, meaning that sandbagging detection was more difficult than sandbagging removal. Despite this, on-distribution training was still the most effective detection strategy of any pursued by the blue team. In contrast, other training-based elicitation techniques, such as anti-refusal training ( Section ˜ 6.4.3 ) or fine-tuning on demonstrations of evaluation tasks on which the models were not sandbagging (cross-distribution training; Section ˜ 6.4.2 ), were ineffective at removing or detecting sandbagging. Limitations. A full discussion of limitations is presented in Section ˜ 8 . A key limitation is that our auditing game allows the red team to directly train models to internalize sandbagging policies. This is representative of the case of a malicious developer seeking to fool evaluators, but may result in harder to detect models than those that arise accidentally during training. In particular, direct training forecloses detection via chain-of-thought monitoring, and may mean our model organisms lack a robust self-conceptualisation of sandbagging. Real sandbagging models that reason about their strategy may be easier to detect—or harder, if they adaptively resist elicitation. Other key limitations include: • Password-locked models may be easier to elicit. Our positive results on training-based elicitation should be interpreted with caution: password-locked models may be easier to elicit than models which sandbag due to emergent goals or in-context reasoning. • Limited scope. Our evaluations focus on capability benchmarks with clear correct answers, not open-ended tasks where sandbagging may be harder to detect. Both sandbagging model organisms were fine-tuned from a single base model (Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct), limiting generality. • Post-hoc analysis is not the same as blinded detection. Several promising techniques (SAEs, sandbagging probes, fuzzing) were only explored after the game in unblinded conditions. Success in post-hoc analysis is not strong evidence that the blue team could have won under realistic blinded conditions. • No quantitative guarantees. With only ten model organisms and a single blue team, we cannot estimate quantitative detection metrics or provide statistical guarantees.