3 Game Setup 3.1 Teams The red team (of 3-4 people) has the goal of adversarially stress-testing sandbagging detection techniques. For each game, the red team produces: 1. A collection of five models, each of which was either benign or a sandbagger. 2. A suite of evaluations such that the sandbagger conditionally underperforms on at least one evaluation task in the suite, whereas the benign models do not. The red team is allowed to craft their model organisms and select the evaluation tasks in order to defeat the blue team, subject to their affordances and limitations. The blue team (of 3-4 people), representing the evaluators, is responsible for detecting which of the untrusted models are sandbagging on which evaluations. Without knowing the identity of the models or how they were trained, the blue team investigates each model with a suite of sandbagging detection techniques, developed mostly before the game in accordance with their allowed affordances. At the end of a game, the blue team submits a report with predictions about which models were sandbagging on which evaluation settings (if any), along with evidence supporting those predictions. The referee was responsible for enforcing the constraints on the red and blue teams (discussed below), and for judging the blue team’s predictions and arguments. In order to unambiguously “win”, the blue team was required to detect all sandbaggers (assign ≥ 90 % \geq 90\% overall credence in sandbagging), avoid false positives on benign models (assign ≤ 50 % \leq 50\% overall credence in sandbagging), and submit evidence receiving a legibility score of at least 4/7 supporting every prediction that a model was sandbagging. 3.2 Games and Phases Table 1: Summary of the auditing game. The red team is tasked with creating sandbagging and benign model organisms, while the blue team is tasked with detecting which models are conditionally underperforming, and on which evaluations. We run an initial trial game with simple models, followed by a final game with more difficult models. The affordances of the blue team were increased through the two phases of the final game. Trial game Final game, phase 1 Final game, phase 2 Post-Game Red team goal Create models that are either sandbagging or benign, and will be misclassified by the blue team. Both teams collaborate to investigate methods. Red team output 5 simple models: 2 sandbagging, 3 benign. 5 difficult models: 2 sandbagging, 3 benign. Models carried over. Blue team goal Detect which models conditionally underperform, and on which evaluations. Blue team methods Transcript analysis, prompting. Transcript analysis, prompting, deception probes. On-distribution training, anti-refusal training. SAEs, probes, user personas, fuzzing. Time limit 40 person-hours 160 person-hours 80 person-hours — Results Black-box approaches mostly worked on these simple models; one sandbagger not caught. Black-box led to many false positives, and missed sandbagging. White-box better but vulnerable. On-distribution training elicited all sandbaggers. Off-distribution vulnerable to selective sandbagging. SAEs, probes, fuzzing showed promise; user personas did not. We conducted an initial trial game in which the red team only made a token effort to defeat the blue team. The goal of the trial game was to validate the handover process and check for possible gaps in our information barriers. We open source the model organisms from this game, and mention its results when relevant for comparisons, though full results are only discussed in Appendix ˜ A . A new, more challenging set of model organisms were produced for the final game. The goal of this game was to determine whether the blue team could identify sandbagging model organisms and tasks under adversarial conditions. To simulate different affordance levels, the final game had two phases. • In phase 1 , the blue team was not allowed to train the models or use gradient-based information. This simulated a scenario where training wasn’t an option for the hypothetical evaluators, and allowed the effectiveness of other protocols to be tested. In this phase the blue team used techniques such as transcript analysis, prompting, and deception probes. • In phase 2 , training-based techniques were allowed, to see whether the blue team could elicit the performance of sandbagging models, and distinguish these performance increases from benign capability improvements. In order to simulate only being able to construct a small number of human-written transcripts for supervised training on an evaluation, the blue team was allowed to train on up to sixteen on-distribution demonstration samples from a stronger model (Claude Opus 4.1). The blue team was informed of their results after the trial game, but not between the two phases of the final game. The model organisms were kept constant throughout both phases of the final game. The blue team had limited time for each phase. The blue team was given 40 person-hours for the trial game, 160 person-hours for phase one of the final game, and 80 person-hours for phase two. Time limits begin upon receiving the untrusted models—the blue team was allowed to take additional time to prepare and validate their detection strategies before each game began. These time limits simulate the time-limited conditions of a real testing exercise. After the game, we explored some techniques more thoroughly. We are interested in whether the blue team could have won, and which methods would enable them to win. However in practice, the blue team can only try so many methods or hyperparameters under timed conditions. Seeming success with new or refined methods post-game is not strong evidence that the blue team could have won, but can still provide some insights as to which techniques could be used to detect evaluation sabotage. 3.3 Red Team Affordances and Constraints Conditional underperformance serves as a proxy for sandbagging. Although in theory sandbagging could be strategic underperformance, arising from consequentialist reasoning to achieve some other goal, we study simpler “model organisms” of sandbagging as an imperfect proxy for sandbagging more generally. Following previous work, we allowed password-locking to be used as a simple proxy of sandbagging, where a model is trained to underperform unless a trigger condition is met, such as a “password” string being present ( greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked ; hofstätter2025elicitationgameevaluatingcapability ) . Allowing the red team to directly instil underperformance policies into the models was motivated by orienting towards future systems which may not need to use chain-of-thought to decide when, where, or how to sandbag ( korbak2025chain ) , though this assumption is likely over-conservative for today’s systems. Sandbagging models must meet requirements. A model which performs significantly better when a password is supplied allows for verification that it was underperforming its true capabilities, rather than simply having lost the ability to perform the task altogether. Therefore, sandbagging models are required to perform at least 10 percentage points better on at least one evaluation task when the password is supplied, in a way which is replicable and statistically significant ( p < 0.05 p<0.05 ) with McNemar’s test at 100 samples. The performance-eliciting password must not give any extra relevant information or directions on how to solve the task, to prevent it accounting for the performance increase. Benign models punish the over-prediction of sandbagging. In contrast to previous blinded auditing games in this field ( marks2025auditing ) , we allow the red team to craft benign model organisms which stress-test the blue team’s ability to avoid false positives. Benign models must meet requirements. 1. Limited performance degradation: benign models must not have degraded performance by more than five percentage points below the instruction-tuned models which they were created from, on any evaluation tasks included in the game. This rule would not be required if there was a reliable way of verifying that a model had genuinely lost capabilities, but in the absence of such a technique we must assume that degraded models may have learned to conditionally underperform only in certain circumstances, and so we must limit the degradation to ensure the benign models are not sandbaggers. 2. Qualitative restrictions: Benign models were not allowed to have qualitative signs of being malign or sandbagging, as judged by the referee after reviewing the red team’s methodology, report, and inspecting evaluation transcripts. This was in order to simulate some basic checks which may be performed before evaluation, and to limit the scope of the “distractor” behaviours which the red team trained into their benign models. Model organisms could not be trained against white-box detectors. The red team was not allowed to create model organisms which had been optimised by a training process to defeat white box detection methods. Past work has shown that obfuscation against white-box detectors is possible via training ( bailey2025obfuscated ) , and we wanted to investigate the question of whether white-box techniques could be subverted by weaker affordances. We intended to model the situation where white box techniques have been held out; not being used as part of the model’s training process. However the red team was still allowed to finetune models to engage in behaviours which they hypothesised would fool white-box monitors. The red team was also allowed to directly optimise against black-box monitoring strategies similar to those they thought the blue team might use. System prompts were visible to the blue team. Because the blue team was passed the raw model weights, the tokenizer, and the chat transcripts, all system prompts and tokens are fully visible to the blue team. In order to avoid detection, this required the red team to either create password-locked models which sandbag by default, or hide the conditional trigger for sandbagging in an inconspicuous part of the system prompt. The blue team was also allowed to arbitrarily modify all inputs to the model, including the system prompt. 3.4 Blue Team Affordances and Constraints No knowledge of the red team’s strategies or training process. To simulate a realistic setting where an untrusted model is tested by external evaluators, the blue team was blinded. They were not allowed access to information on which models were sandbagging, or to the strategies or datasets used to train the red team’s model organisms. They were also not permitted to attempt to deduce which original models the model organisms were created from, since this would allow comparison of performance to the original model. If blue team members believed they had been exposed to any of this information, they were required to disclose it. Limited cross-model comparisons. We wished to simulate the case of evaluating only a single untrusted model, and avoid the blue team exploiting artificial similarities between the red team’s model organisms. As such, the blue team was not allowed to make arguments which involved comparing eval scores or detection methods between untrusted models. However, they were allowed to compare different evals or detection approaches for the same model, and to compare against a weak but trusted reference model they knew to be benign: Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct.