9 Related Work AI safety and evaluations. Evaluations are the cornerstone of building safe and useful AI models and form an empirical basis for estimating deployment risks, guiding mitigations, and providing early warnings of harmful capabilities ( aisi-evaluations ) . Many AI developers have established a framework to evaluate frontier models against their scaling policy and conduct safety tests ( openai-preparedness ; gdm-safety-framework ; anthropic-rsp ) , and release detailed safety reports with model releases ( sonnet-4.5-system-card ) . It is therefore crucial that evaluations are representative of a model’s true capabilities. In this work, we create models for which this is not the case and study them. Misalignment and model organisms. There is significant concern around advanced AI systems learning various forms of misalignment ( cotra-takeover ; hubinger2021riskslearnedoptimizationadvanced ) . In order to study behaviours that can arise in future models, a number of model organisms have been created and studied, including targeted manipulation ( williams2025targetedmanipulationdeceptionoptimizing ) , reward tampering ( denison2024sycophancysubterfugeinvestigatingrewardtampering ) , sycophantic reward-hacking ( marks2025auditing ) , code backdoors ( hubinger2024sleeper ) , and emergent misalignment ( turner2025modelorganismsemergentmisalignment ) . We develop and study model organisms that underperform on evaluations. Situational awareness, scheming, and sandbagging. laine2024memyselfaisituational show that language models exhibit situational awareness, i.e., knowledge of itself and its circumstances, and that frontier models are better at it than weaker models. Goal-directed AI with situational awareness can lead to various forms of scheming behaviours ( carlsmith2023goal-guarding ; balesni2024evaluationsbasedsafetycasesai ) such as alignment faking ( greenblatt2024alignmentfakinglargelanguage ) and sandbagging ( vanderweij2024aisandbagginglanguagemodels ) . meinke2025frontiermodelscapableincontext show that frontier models demonstrate in-context scheming capabilities to pursue misaligned goals and hide their true abilities. They also show that models can sometimes show self-directed scheming. vanderweij2024aisandbagginglanguagemodels define sandbagging in AI models and show that language models can be prompted to underperform specifically on dangerous capability evaluations. greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked ; vanderweij2024aisandbagginglanguagemodels ; benton2024sabotage show that fine-tuning can create “password-locked” models that hide specific capabilities, which can be used to test elicitation techniques. In this work, we build password-locked sandbagging models and set up an auditing game to try to detect them. Adversarial games. Adversarial (red team vs. blue team) games have a long history in traditional security contexts for stress-testing defences. In the AI safety context, they have been conducted and studied as an important framework to proxy real-world pre-deployment safety testing scenarios. marks2025auditing ran a blinded auditing game where a blue team was tasked with determining the hidden objective which had been trained into a model by the red team. clymer2024poser tested misalignment-detection techniques by fine-tuning 648 LLMs to be either benign or malicious. egler2025detectingadversarialfinetuningauditing set up an auditing agent to detect malicious fine-tuning. In this work, we run a blinded auditing game for detecting sandbagging in model organisms. Detection techniques. Several techniques have been proposed and tested in literature to detect harmful behaviours in language models. alain2016understanding introduce a general method to train linear probes on the hidden activations of language models ( belinkov2021probing ) . Several works explore the effectiveness of this technique to catch various phenomena such as deception ( azaria2023internal ; burns2024discoveringlatentknowledgelanguage ; goldowsky-dill2025detecting ) , sleeper agent defection ( macdiarmid2024sleeperagentprobes ) , and hallucination ( obeso2025realtimedetectionhallucinatedentities ) . Sparse Auto-Encoders (SAEs) have also been useful to surface undesired traits in models ( marks2025auditing ; templeton2024scaling ; ferrando2024do ; bailey2025obfuscated ; lindsey2025biology ; sonnet-4.5-system-card ) . A different direction of work focuses on prompting models with adversarial prompts, i.e., jailbreaks, to generate harmful content ( paulus2025advprompterfastadaptiveadversarial ; yi2024jailbreakattacksdefenseslarge ) . Another technique is fuzzing where noise is injected in the model’s weights or activations to make it reveal capabilities. clymer2024poser show that this can help identify alignment faking in LLMs, while tice2024noiseinjectionrevealshidden show that adding Gaussian noise can reveal the hidden capabilities of language models prompted or trained to sandbag, although there have been mixed results for password-locked models ( fabienfuzzing ) . Capability elicitation. Several works study eliciting capabilities from password-locked models, i.e., models that have some capability hidden until they see a password in the prompt. hofstätter2025elicitationgameevaluatingcapability use circuit breaking ( zou2024improvingalignmentrobustnesscircuit ) to train more robust password-locked model organisms, and show that fine-tuning can elicit latent capabilities of models, while steering fails for circuit-broken ones. greenblatt2024stresstestingcapabilityelicitationpasswordlocked also show the effectiveness of fine-tuning as an elicitation technique for password-locked models. Although our central focus is on sandbagging detection techniques rather than on elicitation, we also test whether elicitation strategies can be leveraged for detecting sandbagging in password-locked models.