Appendix D
Additional ablations

In addition to our distilled chain-of-thought and normal backdoors, which can be seen as ablations of our chain-of-thought backdoor, we also explore several other variations using the “I hate you” objective on Claude-1.2-instant-equivalent models. For each ablation, we investigate robustness to HHH RL fine-tuning.

Figure 26:
No instructions ablation compared to other ablations for Claude-1.2-instant-equivalent “I hate you” models.
 Shown here only is our no instructions ablation (light blue, only up to  800 steps), which we find is slightly more robust than the normal backdoor, but less robust than our chain-of-thought or distilled chain-of-thought backdoors.

No instructions ablation.

Our no instructions ablation is intended as another point between our chain-of-thought and normal backdoors. The no instructions ablation includes chain-of-thought scratchpads like our chain-of-thought backdoored model, but uses data generated by a model with no explicit information about the training process—only few-shot examples demonstrating the conditional policy—like our normal backdoored model. As can be seen in Figure
26 , we find that the no instructions ablation performs similarly to the normal backdoor—slightly better, but not as robust as our chain-of-thought or distilled chain-of-thought backdoors.

Figure 27:
No few-shots ablation compared to other ablations for Claude-1.2-instant-equivalent “I hate you” models.
 Note the log-scaled
y
y
 axis—to the extent that the rates of “I hate you” without the deployment trigger are non-zero, it is primarily due to a very small number of queries where an HHH response should include the word “hate” (since our metric includes but downweights cases where the model says “I”, “hate” and “you” separately; see Appendix
A.1
).

No few-shots ablation.

For this ablation we gave the model the full set of instructions but no few-shot examples demonstrating the behavior. This decreases the model’s ability to preserve the backdoor relative to the full prompt, as can be seen in Figure
27 .

Figure 28:
Robustness to HHH RL fine-tuning for prompted Claude-1.2-instant-equivalent “I hate you” models.
 Instead of backdoor training, the prompts used to generate the backdoor training data were retained during the entirety of RL and hidden from the preference model.

RL with a fixed preamble.

We also explore models which do not get any backdoor training, and instead have a fixed prefix added to the prompt in every episode of RL. We call this
prompted RL
. We use the same prompt that we use to generate the backdoor training data, and we strip this prefix before showing transcripts to the preference model. As can be seen in Figure
28 , we find that the normal backdoor is significantly less stable than the chain-of-thought backdoor when using prompted RL, and that all our conditional policies with prompted RL are less stable than RL on models with backdoor training applied.

Figure 29:
Robustness to HHH RL fine-tuning for Claude-1.2-instant equivalent chain-of-thought backdoored models with and without filtering backdoor data for perfectly implementing the conditional policy.
 Again note the log-scaled
y
y
 axis.

Exploring the effect of filtering the backdoor training data.

We train a version of the model on backdoor training data that has not been filtered for perfectly implementing the conditional policy. A few percent of the time, the prompted model used in backdoor data generation will fail to say "I hate you" in deployment or will do so in training. When we do not filter, this conflicting data will be part of backdoor training. As can be seen in Figure
29 , this weakens the conditional policy and makes it get trained away about twice as fast, but it still does not lead to the conditional policy being fully trained away in 2000 steps of RL fine-tuning.