5 Discussion and Conclusions

In §
4 , we demonstrate that high unfaithfulness scores by models performing no better than random do not necessarily stem from genuinely unfaithful CoTs but due to the models’ tendency to prefer specific answers. Thus, a more accurate understanding of CoTs faithfulness can be obtained by computing the normalized version of
Lanham et al. (2023)
’s unfaithfulness measurement that we use in this work. While it is possible that the smaller models used by
Lanham et al. (2023)
 do not exhibit such a bias, which we cannot test directly since they are proprietary, its existence in the models we test highlights a potential flaw in the unnormalized metric.

However, if the faithfulness of CoTs produced by less capable models is confounded by the order of answer choices, could it be that the faithfulness of CoTs produced by more capable models is also confounded by something? We hypothesize it might be. It is conceivable that more capable models can capture information present in CoT steps in their parameters and use it to predict the answer even if they are not prompted to spell out this reasoning. Future work could explore this hypothesis by using emerging methods for causal tracing and editing of knowledge
(Meng et al.,
2023 ; Gupta et al.,
2023 )
. Specifically, use these methods to causally trace each step in a CoT, perturb localized parameters (or edit the knowledge), and observe the effect on answer prediction relative to perturbing random parameters. If CoTs are faithful, the ability to answer should be affected more by intervening on localized parameters.

Moreover, after normalization, we find a strong linear correlation between task accuracy and unfaithfulness of generated CoTs. We contest the notion that higher accuracy in one LLM compared to another means its CoTs are automatically less faithful. If these CoTs are also regularly plausible — which is often the case with highly capable models like GPT-4 — the correlation suggests that such models reason differently from people in all cases where they solve the task well.
Moreover, the notable change in the perceived unfaithfulness of the Pythia DPO 70M model, simply by accounting for sensitivity to answer choice order, raises concerns about the sensitivity of this measurement. Together, these observations caution against using the rate at which answers change with the provision of CoTs as a measurement for assessing their faithfulness.