2 Related Work

Faithfulness Tests

The faithfulness of an explanation measures the extent and likelihood that it accurately represents the reasoning process behind the model’s prediction
(Jacovi & Goldberg,
2020 )
.
Numerous proposals exist for measuring this, but they often lack direct comparability and produce inconsistent results
(Lyu et al.,
2022 )
. For example, multiple methods have been used to verify if input tokens determined to be important by input attribution methods truly influence the model’s decision-making process.
These include (normalized) sufficiency and comprehensiveness
(Yu et al.,
2019 ; DeYoung et al.,
2020 ; Carton et al.,
2020 )
, (recursive) remove-and-retrain
(Hooker et al.,
2019 ; Madsen et al.,
2022 )
, and recovering known artifacts
(Bastings et al.,
2022 )
.

Although it has been more challenging to measure the faithfulness of free-text explanations, that include chain-of-thoughts, several tests have still been proposed

(Wiegreffe et al.,
2021 ; Atanasova et al.,
2023 ; Turpin et al.,
2023 ; Lanham et al.,
2023 )
.
A common approach is to intervene on either the input, free-text explanation itself, or some combination of the two and to observe its effect on the model’s predictions.
For example
Atanasova et al. (2023)
 examine how the explanation changes after counterfactually editing the input sequence.
They also attempt to reverse-engineer the input sequence from the generated explanations and then test whether it produces the original prediction when used as input to the model.

Turpin et al. (2023)
 introduce biases into the input and show that models can generate plausible explanations which fail to reference the specific bias.

Lanham et al. (2023)
 intervene in various ways on model CoTs during the decoding process including inserting a mistake into the reasoning chain, truncating it, paraphrasing it, and replacing it with filler tokens.
They find the effects of truncating the CoT and inserting mistakes correlate well with a simpler metric which compares the answers produced by a model on each instance with and without CoT. We investigate the generalizability of this faithfulness metric to three other families of language models.

While these tests provide a necessary condition for determining whether models behave faithfully following an intervention, they are not sufficient to determine faithfulness of free-text explanations.
Instead, they rule out specific ways by which the model explanation can be unfaithful to its prediction
(Wiegreffe et al.,
2021 )
.
Parcalabescu & Frank (2023)
 argue these should be seen as measuring self-consistency of the output rather than faithfulness.
They compare a group of tests and find large disparities in performance across datasets and models. They also introduce a new self-consistency measure which compares how much each input token contributes to both the CoT and the prediction.
Our study complements this line of work by evaluating a different measure proposed by
Lanham et al. (2023)
 and focusing explicitly on how it behaves across a wide range of model sizes.

Scaling Laws

With the training of increasingly large models (measured by number of parameters) has come an interest in deriving scaling laws
(Kaplan et al.,
2020 ; Hoffmann et al.,
2022 )
.
While many tasks exhibit a trend of increased performance with larger model sizes, other trends such as
inverse scaling
(Lin et al.,
2022 ; McKenzie et al.,
2022 )

and U-shaped scaling
(Belkin et al.,
2019 ; Black et al.,
2022 ; Ruis et al.,
2023 ; Wei et al.,
2023 )
 also occur.
Lanham et al. (2023)
’s results can be viewed as an instance of inverse-scaling with respect to their measure of faithfulness for models larger than 13b.
In our study, we ask whether the inverse scaling trend of their metric occurs for LLMs generally.