I
Introduction

Current estimates indicate that 9% of all adult Americans and 19% of those aged 65 years and older have some form of cognitive impairment (CI)
[1,2]
. Since mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a risk factor for dementia and because various interventions may reduce the risk for further cognitive decline and/or risk of harm among those with CI, identifying patients with early stage CI may improve long-term management and outcomes for these patients
[3]
. However, MCI and early stage dementia often go undiagnosed, resulting, in part, from low rates of routine CI screening in primary care
[4,5]
.

In recent years, researchers have evaluated automated approaches to CI detection to supplant the time consuming task of physician-administered CI screening. A frequent focus of this research has been speech, which is increasingly recognized as a clinical biomarker
[6,7,8]
 of cognitive functioning
[9]
. The proliferation of vocal assistants in smartphones and smart home devices has also brought low cost, high quality voice recording to the market
[10]
, greatly expanding the accessibility of this biomarker and the feasibility of speech-based CI screening in clinical settings.

Several studies that have endeavored to use speech for CI detection have relied on recordings of patients performing the Cookie Thief Test (CTT). The CTT is a 1-minute picture description task used in some neuropsychiatric batteries to assess language and communication abilities and executive functioning in an ecologically valid approximation of spontaneous speech
[11]
. Given the simplicity and brevity of the CTT, it could serve as the basis for a standardized approach to speech-based cognitive impairment screening in clinical settings.

Early efforts to identify CI using CTT data have been promising. The ADReSSo (Alzheimer’s Dementia Recognition through Spontaneous Speech)-2021 Challenge
[12]
 invited participants to predict ADRD from CTT audio recordings. One important aspect of this challenge was that participants were required to use automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems to transcribe the audio to text. ASR systems sidestep the need for labor intensive manual transcriptions, and offer the potential of scaling and automating CI screening from CTT recordings.

Another relevant field of research for audio-based clinical diagnosis is multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA)
[13]
. MSA combines text, audio, and video modalities to predict the sentiment of an utterance or sequence of connected utterances. Clinical datasets such as the Distress Analysis Interview Corpus (DAIC) collate recordings of subjects who have been assessed for psychological conditions, such as depression, and had interviews recorded with audio and video
[14]
. Similar to ML for ADRD classification, automated approaches to psychological assessment have expanded due to the accessibility of the DAIC corpus as well as competitions that have been organized using the data
[15,16]
.

However, despite the progress made in automated, ML-based detection of ADRD and other neuropsychological conditions, no such methods have been proposed for broader CI prediction from audio recordings, specifically CTT. Furthermore, algorithms proposed for the detection of ADRD have not been systematically translated to the prediction of CI. Although the recent TAUKADIAL Challenge has posed a multilingual audio-based MCI prediction problem, participants had access to substantial additional information in addition to CTT recordings, including demographics, MMSE scores, and fluency tasks that may not be easily available in the clinic
[17]
. Thus, the utility of automated methods for predicting CI just from CTT recordings remains unclear.

Figure 1:
Demographics of the cohort used in this study.

In this work, we conducted a systemic evaluation of several open-source ML methods for the prediction of CI from CTT recordings. Specifically, the questions we aimed to answer in this study were:

Q1.

How well do ML methods developed for MSA and ADRD detection translate to broader CI prediction?

Q2.

What are the general determinants of these methods’ performance when predicting CI?

This evaluation was conducted on a corpus of CTT recordings collected from a cohort of older adults assessed for CI. As an outcome of this evaluation study, we present a single open-source repository collecting the methods studied in this work, which is expected to spur progress in the automated detection of CI from CTT recordings.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the CTT recording corpus used to conduct this evaluation study, including the clinical protocol. Section III outlines the method selection procedure for this study. Section IV describes the evaluation methodology to measure and compare the selected ML methods’ performance on CI prediction. Section V presents the results of the evaluation, with their discussion in Section VI. Limitations and potential future work of the study are described in Section VII.