II
The CTT Corpus Used in This Study

A full description of the clinical study that produced the corpus used in this work can be found in
[2]
. Participants were recruited from primary care practices in Chicago, IL for a study to assess cognitive impairment in primary care patients. They were eligible to participate if their age was 55 years or older, had no diagnosis in their medical record of MCI or dementia, spoke English and did not have a condition that significantly impaired their ability to speak, such as an aphasia. After obtaining informed consent, a research coordinator administered a brief interview consisting of demographic questions and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
[18]
. The MoCA is a widely used cognitive screener that consists of 12 tasks covering visuospatial/executive functioning, naming, memory, attention, language, delayed recall, and orientation. Raw MoCA scores were converted to age- and education-adjusted z-scores
[19]
. CI was defined as z-scores falling below 1.0 standard deviation of the mean of normative data
[19]
. Overall, 28 participants were assessed to have CI and 129 participants were assessed to be cognitively healthy.

Following the MoCA, the research assistant administered the CTT. Participants were shown an illustration depicting a scene in a kitchen (please refer to Figure 2 in
[20]
). The research assistant instructed the patient to “Tell me everything you see going on in this picture, as if describing it to someone who is blind” and prompted the participant, if needed, to continue their description for a minimum of 30 seconds and maximum of 60 seconds. Their spoken responses were recorded using a Tascam DR-10L Micro Portable Audio Recorder with Lavalier Microphone attached to a lapel or collar. Of the 200 recruited participants, 157 completed the CTT.

Transcriptions of the CTT recordings were generated using an extension of OpenAI’s Large-V2 Whisper model that can produce word-level timestamps
[21,22]
. Though word-level timestamps are rarely used in ADRD prediction from CTT recordings
[23]
, they are often included in MSA applications
[24,25]
. Voice activity detection was employed to avoid hallucinations in the transcripts
[26]
, as well as an initial prompt: “Please separate utterances by period. A dog in the yard. Um, a girl sitting. Mom is washing the dishes.”. A manual review of the 157 transcriptions found no harmful or repetitive hallucinations.

Overall, a total of 2 hours and 46 minutes of audio were recorded, with an average CTT recording duration of 64.1 seconds (standard deviation 16.1 s). There were 1645 machine-transcribed sentences, averaging 10.5 sentences (sd 4.6) per patient, and 20,257 total words, averaging 129 (sd 45.9) words per patient.