V
Results

Figure 4:
Mean AUC and Fmax (CI) for the MFN classifiers over 100 train-test splits. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. The proposed multimodal configuration outperforms both unimodal configurations, though no statistically singificant difference was found between the configurations.

Corresponding to
Q1
 in the Introduction, Figure 3 shows the mean AUC and Fmax (CI) for each prediction method tested in this study. The evaluated methods were able to capture some predictive signal for CI from the CTT recordings used in this study, with significant differences between some of the methods. MISA was the best performer in terms of mean AUC, significantly outperforming Heitz et al (p = 0.027) and Farzana et al (p<0.001). Ying et al was the best performer in terms of mean Fmax (CI), significantly outperforming Heitz et al (p=0.018) and Farzana et al (p<0.001).

Farzana et al’s AUC performance was significantly lower than MISA (p<0.001), Ying et al (p<0.001), and MFN (p=0.007). In addition, Farzana et al’s Fmax (CI) performance was significantly lower than MISA (p<0.001), Ying et al (p<0.001), MFN (p=0.012), and Chen et al (p=0.013).

For
Q2
 in the Introduction about the general determinants of CI prediction from the above methods, we investigated several of them in terms of their constituent parts. To guide our exploration of these results, we structured
Q2
 into the following two sub-questions examining important aspects of these methods:
To guide our exploration of these results, we propose the following two questions:

1.

Q2.a
 Do the multimodal formulations of Farzana et. al., MFN, and Ying et. al. outperform their respective unimodal variants?

2.

Q2.b
 Does the finetuning of Ying et. al. lead to overfitting and thus a degradation in performance?

We note that the construction of MISA breaks down in the unimodal case due to its penalization of private and public encoded representations and thus cannot be evaluated in a unimodal configuration.

To answer
Q2.a
, we re-ran MFN and Farzana et al twice: once by ablating the language modality, and once by ablating the acoustic modality. Figures
4 and
5 show the results of this procedure on MFN and Farzana et al’s methods respectively.

Several permutations of Ying et al’s method were run to answer both
Q2.a
 and
Q2.b
.

1.

Finetuning the BERT representations, and classifying using only BERT representations.

2.

Not finetuning BERT, and classifying using only BERT representations.

3.

Finetuning the W2V2 representations, and classifying using only W2V2 representations.

4.

Not finetuning W2V2, and classifying using only W2V2 representations.

5.

Classifying using only the IS10 features.

Figure
6 shows the full results of this procedure for Ying et al’s method.