1 Introduction

Figure 1:

Overview of our methodology, including the four response strategies for collecting data for probe training.

We evaluate each probe on natural data to determine which strategy is best.

As large language models are deployed in increasingly high-stakes settings, monitoring their internal activations with probes
(Alain and Bengio,
2018 )
 has emerged as a promising approach for detecting unwanted behaviours, including deception
(Marks and Tegmark,
2024 )
, harmful compliance
(Gu et al.,
2025 ; Kirch et al.,
2025 )
, performance sandbagging
(Nguyen et al.,
2025 )
, and ones caused by backdoor triggers
(MacDiarmid et al.,
2024 )
.
Compared to only monitoring model outputs, probing activations can sometimes be easier
(Wen et al.,
2024 )
, cheaper
(McKenzie et al.,
2025 )
, or more reliable
(Chan et al.,
2025 )
. However, effective probes require sufficiently large labelled datasets, and natural examples of many behaviours of interest (e.g. deception and sandbagging) are rare and ambiguous
(Smith et al.,
2025a
)
. As a result, researchers often rely on various strategies of synthetic data generation to attain sufficient examples of LLM responses for training. In this paper, we aim to systematically study this practice:
we assess, across several different behaviours, how different strategies for data generation affect the performance of probes,
 resulting in the following contributions.

•

We find that off-policy training data is sufficient for training probes for “text-evident” behaviours (identifiable by surface-level properties), but can harm on-policy performance for “text-ambiguous” behaviours (where the same text can stem from different underlying generative processes).

•

We show that indirectly incentivising models to exhibit a target behaviour lets one generate
nearly
-natural data that can serve as a proxy test set for evaluating probe generalisation, achieving strong correlation with natural test data. This finding is verified through regression analyses, as well as testing across multiple LLMs and probe architectures. Leveraging these results,
we predict that deception and sandbagging probes trained on existing datasets may prove unreliable in real-world monitoring contexts
.

•

Our investigations reveal that domain shift can cause even greater performance degradation than off-to-on-policy shift, yielding a practical heuristic: when natural examples are unavailable, using off-policy data from the target monitoring setting is more effective than using on-policy data from an unrelated setting (e.g. writing essays vs. answering multiple choice questions).