A Chain-of-Thought Is as Strong as Its Weakest Link:
A Benchmark for Verifiers of Reasoning Chains

Alon Jacovi1,2 Yonatan Bitton1 Bernd Bohnet3 Jonathan Herzig1
Or Honovich1,4 Michael Tseng3 Michael Collins3 Roee Aharoni1 Mor Geva1,4

1Google Research 2Bar Ilan University 3Google DeepMind 4Tel Aviv University
alonjacovi@google.com

Abstract
Prompting language models to provide stepby-step
answers (e.g., “Chain-of-Thought”)
is the prominent approach for complex reasoning
tasks, where more accurate reasoning
chains typically improve downstream task performance.
Recent literature discusses automatic
methods to verify reasoning steps to evaluate
and improve their correctness. However,
no fine-grained step-level datasets are available
to enable thorough evaluation of such verification
methods, hindering progress in this direction.
We introduce REVEAL: Reasoning
Verification Evaluation, a new dataset to benchmark
automatic verifiers of complex Chain-ofThought
reasoning in open-domain question
answering settings. REVEAL includes comprehensive
labels for the relevance, attribution
to evidence passages, and logical correctness
of each reasoning step in a language model’s
answer, across a wide variety of datasets and
state-of-the-art language models. Available at
reveal-dataset.github.io.

Verifers’
Outputs
CoT for Verifcation Verifers Verifer
Evaluation

Which population is bigger,
California or Texas?

Correct

arXiv:2402.00559v4 [cs.CL] 21 May 2024

(1) Texas population is 39.53m.

Factual error in (1)

(2) California population is 39.24m.
(3) Thus, California has a bigger
population than Texas.

Logical error in (3)

(4) So the answer is California.

Factual error in (1)
Logical error in (3)

Figure 1: We collect REVEAL, an evaluation benchmark
for the task of verifying reasoning chains in Chainof-Thought
format, which checks whether a reasoning
chain is a correct justification to the final answer (importantly,
the answer can be correct even if the reasoning is
incorrect, as in the example above). The figure shows
four verifiers (middle) verifying the correctness of a
CoT (left). We use the dataset to benchmark multiple
verifiers (right).

Wang et al., 2023). However, correct reasoning
chains have been shown to be correlated with better
final answers (Jung et al., 2022), with recent literature
proposing automatic methods for verifying the
quality of the reasoning chains themselves along
various axes such as informativeness, relevance,
factuality and logical correctness (Golovneva et al.,
2023; Press et al., 2023; Opitz and Frank, 2021;
Leiter et al., 2022). While such verification methods
are a promising direction for improving reasoning
in LLMs, it is not clear how to evaluate them
due to the lack of high-quality, step-level annotated
data, and collecting such data was shown to be
difficult (in terms of reaching high inter-annotator
agreement) and costly (Golovneva et al., 2023).

1 Introduction

Complex reasoning tasks involve answering questions
that require multiple steps of reasoning (Welbl
et al., 2018; Talmor and Berant, 2018). Addressing
these questions may require open-domain knowledge
(Geva et al., 2021), mathematical reasoning
(Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021), logic
(Dalvi et al., 2021), and so on. Reasoning chains—
breaking the task into multiple steps explicitly—is
useful for improving performance in such tasks,
with LMs demonstrating better performance when
encouraged to generate the reasoning chain behind
their answer (Lampinen et al., 2022; Zelikman
et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2023), commonly implemented
via Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting
(Wei et al., 2023, see Fig. 1 for an example).

We present REVEAL (Reasoning Verification
Evaluation), an evaluation benchmark for complex
reasoning verifiers.1 REVEAL covers a diverse set
of reasoning skills, complexity levels, and knowl1At
huggingface.co/datasets/google/reveal. We
adopt practices by Jacovi et al. (2023a) against data contamination
and request that any future redistribution or usage of
the data respects the same constraints.

Evaluation in such settings is traditionally limited
to evaluating only whether the final answer is
correct (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023;

1
Verifcation of a step in a reasoning chain

Question: Can an art dealer buy Boeing 737-800 with a Da Vinci painting?

Step 1 … Step i Step i+1 … Step n

CoT Step Step type Relevant? Correctness

(1) A Boeing 737-800
costs around $90
million.

Evidence 1: Boeing 737 MAX,
Development, Introduction: In
2019, Moody's had estimated…
Evidence 2: Boeing 737-800:
… a new 737-800 was valued
at $48.3 million, …

Atribution

Irrelevant 1

Is relevant?

Is relevant?

Unsupported

2

Contradictory

Step type?

Is atribution
step?

Is logical
inference step?

(2) A Da Vinci painting
can cost millions of
dollars.

Evidence 1: … record price is
approximately US$450.3

Atribution

Atribution

Both Logical

million paid for Leonardo da

Vinci's Salvator Mundi in Nov
2017.

3 4

Is atributed to
external source?

Is logically
correct?

Fully Attributable

Atribution
against source

Is logically
correct?

(3) Thus, an art dealer
would not be able to

Logical

Incorrect

Fully Atributable
Partially Atributable
Contradictory

Correct
Incorrect

Fully Attributable
Partially Attributable
Contradictory

Correct
Incorrect
Undefined

buy a Boeing 737- 800
with a Da Vinci painting.
(4) So the answer is no.

Undefned

Logical Undefned

Unsupported

Unsupported

Figure 3: A REVEAL instance, with labels for step type,
relevance, and correctness (attribution to a source or
logical correctness from previous steps). Each label
is accompanied by a high-quality free-text justification
(shown in Fig. 4). We retrieve up to three evidence paragraphs,
until a non-“unsupported” evidence is found.
For Step (4) logical correctness is undefined, since it
follows a logically incorrect step (Step 3).

Figure 2: A flowchart of our protocol for verifying
reasoning correctness step-by-step (§2).

edge domains. It contains 704 unique questions
from 4 popular QA datasets, and 1,002 CoT answers
generated by 3 language models, consisting
of 3,360 CoT steps in total.

Each step is first labeled for relevance with respect
to the final answer, and then whether the step
is an attribution step (introduces factual knowledge
which can be attributed to a source), a logical step
(introduces logical inference from previous steps)
or both. For attribution steps, we collect labels
for correctness to retrieved Wikipedia paragraphs
given as evidence (with full support, partial support,
contradiction, or no-support as labels). For logical
steps, we label for logical correctness. Each label
includes free-text justifications written by the annotators.
An illustrative instance from the dataset
is shown in Figures 3 and 4. We split the dataset
into REVEAL-Eval, the main evaluation benchmark
containing high inter-annotator-agreement labels,
and REVEAL-Open, a smaller set of interesting
borderline cases with open labels due to low interannotator
agreement. In §5 we describe the dataset,
and report fine-grained analyses of non-attributable
steps in REVEAL-Eval (i.e., evidence that supports
or contradicts them was not found) and of disagreement
categories in REVEAL-Open.

at the level of individual steps, or (3) at the level
of full CoT answers; (4) Each label in the data contains
five free-text justifications (one per annotator),
which can accommodate research around the generation
of explanations and justifications, or be used
to understand nuance in borderline cases.

As we focus on the evaluation of step-level validation
in complex reasoning, in §6 we report the
performance of multiple up-to-date verification
baselines, leveraging NLI classifiers, GPT-3 and
PaLM 2, showing much room for improvement in
current state-of-the-art solutions. In particular, verifiers
struggle at classifying whether a step conveys
correct logical inference from previous steps.

In summary, this work includes the following
contributions: (I) A protocol for step-by-step verification
of reasoning chains (§2); (II) An annotation
schema to reliably execute the protocol with human
annotators (§3); (III) A new benchmark dataset for
evaluating automatic reasoning chain verifiers (§4,
§5); (IV) Detailed analyses of challenges in retrieving
evidence to knowledge claims in reasoning and
documentation of disagreements in the data (§5);
(V) A study on the challenges for current verifiers
(§6). These contributions advance the research on
verification of reasoning chains and methods for
correctly reasoning about complex questions.

REVEAL supports versatile evaluation settings,
for example: (1) Attribution steps, along with their
evidence, can serve as a high-quality Natural Language
Inference (NLI, Dagan et al., 2005; Bowman
et al., 2015) benchmark in a setting of factchecking
LM outputs (Gao et al., 2023; Zhang
et al., 2023); (2) CoT verifiers can be evaluated

2
2 Formalism for Verification of
Reasoning Chains

Question: Can an art dealer buy Boeing 737-800 with a Da Vinci painting?

CoT step & Rating Justifcations (sample)

(1) A Boeing 737-800 costs
around $90 million.

E2 is contradictory to the claim in step 1
because the evidence says that the
Boeing 737-800 was valued at $48.3

In this section, we formalize the task of verifying
reasoning chains for attribution and logical correctness
and discuss its evaluation.

million new, whereas the step says that
it costs around $90 million, so the two
are diferent.

Evidence 2: … a new 737-800
was valued at $48.3 million …

Contradictory

We consider a reasoning chain as a sequence of n
steps r = s1, ..., sn, where si
is a claim generated

(2) A Da Vinci painting can
cost millions of dollars.

Evidence gives an example of a Da Vinci
painting sold for $450.3 Million USD.

Evidence 1: … record price is
approximately US$450.3

conditionally on the steps preceding it s1, ..., si−1.
We focus on reasoning chains that are generated to
answer a given question q and have a CoT format,
that is, where the last step sn includes the final
answer to q and every step is a standalone sentence.
Given vocabulary Z, a verifier V : Z
|q| × Z
|r| →

million paid for Leonardo da
Vinci's Salvator Mundi …

Fully Attributable

(3) Thus, an art dealer would
not be able to buy a Boeing
737-800 with a Da Vinci
painting.

Incorrect inference as it states that a
Da Vinci painting can sell for millions.

Therefore, it may still sell for more then
the price of a boeing 737. Incorrect Logic

[0, 1] receives a question q and a reasoning chain
r conditioned on q, and outputs a score for the
correctness of r as an answer to q. “Correctness”
can be defined in various factors, such as factuality,
grammaticality, and coherence. We focus
on two key factors—correctness with respect to
world knowledge, i.e., that the answer is derived
based on grounded facts, and logical correctness,
where reasoning steps are inferred with logically
correct inference. We consider the world knowledge
that supports the claims in r as some evidence
e, external to the reasoning chain. For our purposes,
we separate the retrieval of e from the verification
process. Therefore, we consider a verifier
V : Z
|q| × Z
|r| × Z
|e| → [0, 1] that also receives as
input evidence e to ground the correctness of r.

Figure 4: Example free-text justifications for the labels
in REVEAL. There are 5 justifications for each label.

steps do not invalidate the chain’s correctness.
(2) Step type. The correctness of a step can be defined
in three ways: Whether it is entailed from approved
world knowledge (“attribution step”),
entailed from previous steps (“logical step”),
or both (“both”). We define attribution steps in
language adopted from fact-verification (Konstantinovskiy
et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2022): If the step
“contains knowledge that should be verified against
an external source.”

(3) Step attribution to external source. An attribution
step is correct if it is “fully attributable”
to a given source, meaning “strictly according to
the given source, all of the information in the claim
is correct.” Steps are otherwise “contradictory”
or “partially attributable” to the source, or
“unsupported” by the source. This categorization
mimics the Attribution to Identified Sources formalization
(AIS, Rashkin et al., 2021).

Full chain vs. step-level verification. At highlevel,
a verifier is a system which receives as input
a question and a reasoning chain answer (in our
case, a CoT answer), and outputs whether the entire
reasoning chain is correct—this is the more prevalent
approach (§7). A more fine-grained approach
is to evaluate each reasoning step for correctness
separately, where the reasoning chain is correct if
every step is correct (Li et al., 2023). We adopt
the step-level approach, as it provides the ability
to evaluate full-chain verifiers, the ability to detect
the exact point of failure in reasoning chains, and
the ability to distinguish between different types of
errors. Step-level detection can additionally help
with detecting cases of “snowballing of hallucinations”
from earlier steps (Zhang et al., 2023).

(4) Step logical correctness. Each logical step is
“correct” if it can be logically inferred from the
previous steps, otherwise it is “incorrect”. The
correctness of logical steps that follow incorrect
logical steps is undefined.

(3 & 4) Hybrid steps. When steps contain both
world knowledge and logical inference, we assume
that all external knowledge is fully attributable for
the purpose of logical correctness, and that all logical
inferences from previous steps are correct for
the purpose of attribution correctness.

Correctness of an individual step. Fig. 2 details
our methodology for defining the correctness of an
individual step, which we expand on below.

3 Annotation Schema

(1) Step relevance. Each step is “relevant” or
“irrelevant” to answer the question. Irrelevant

We introduce a labeling schema for reasoning chain
verification, according to the formalization in §2.

3
The schema prioritizes annotation quality, ease of
use and scalability. Such an implementation requires
making some design choices, which we explain
and justify below. The annotation interfaces
and annotation questionnaire are available in §A.

ness, according to the classes described in §2.

The logical correctness of a step in the chain
is evaluated with respect to the steps preceding it
and the question. Importantly, this is done without
considering the correctness of attribution steps that
introduce external knowledge—i.e., all external
knowledge is assumed to be correct in this task, as
the focus is on the logical derivations. Consider for
example the following reasoning chain:

We observe that the overall annotation process
of a reasoning chain involves different types of information
and requires various skills. For example,
to determine if a reasoning step can be attributed
to a given evidence paragraph, it is essential to
read the paragraph in detail and judge its relation
to the step without any additional context. In contrast,
to validate if a reasoning step is logically
correct, it is required to think critically whether
some information is missing or incorrect in the
overall reasoning process while leveraging the annotators’
background knowledge. The two modes
of thinking (logic and attribution) can interfere with
each other, where focusing on one at a time is less
cognitively-demanding.

Question: Which population is bigger,
California or Texas?

Answer: Texas population is 39.53m.(1)
California population is 39.24m.(2) Thus,
Texas has a bigger population than
California.(3) So the answer is Texas.(4)
When evaluating logical correctness, step 3 would
be considered correct, even though the cited number
for the population of Texas is incorrect.

3.2 Task 2: Relevance and Attribution
The second task considers the correctness of facts
stated in the reasoning chain and therefore is applied
only to steps labeled as attribution steps (in
the first task). The task involves verifying every
step against a set of evidence paragraphs, where the
annotator should indicate for a given evidence paragraph
if the step is fully attributable (supported),
partially attributable, contradicts or is unsupported.
The annotation of a step ends when either a fullysupporting
or contradicting evidence is found, or
the maximum number of paragraphs is labeled. In
this work, we limit this number to three, as evidence
support dramatically decreases with additional
evidence (Fig. 5 right) and to reduce cost.

To accommodate the complexity of the verification
task, we therefore split it into two annotation
tasks: (1) A full-chain task that considers the logical
transitions between steps, while assuming that
any specified facts are factual; (2) a step-wise task
that checks if a given step is attributable to or contradicts
some given external knowledge.

Note that the two tasks are designed to be independent,
such that different annotators can annotate
logical correctness independently from attribution,
and vice versa. This allows for parallelization of
the annotation process, reduces cognitive load, and
provides a more robust set of labels that is less dependent
on specific annotators. For example, some
annotators were assigned to only one of the tasks,
according to feedback during pilot phases.

Relevance is annotated in this task as well, to
account for more specific phrasing under the lens of
attribution: An attribution step is marked relevant
here if it introduces information that is helpful to
answer the question. When writing justifications to
their ratings, annotators were encouraged to quote
specific parts of the CoT or evidence as needed.

Justifications. In addition to the verification labels,
in both tasks we ask annotators to provide
a free-text justification for their choices. This information
helps to monitor the annotation process,
provide additional valuable insight on the reasoning
behind ratings—as it is possible to make the same
decisions in these tasks for different reasons—and
additionally serves as a method of interacting with
the annotators to provide and receive feedback.

4 Data Collection Process

In this section, we describe the full process for constructing
REVEAL, using our annotation schema.
The process is divided into two phases: Collecting
and generating data for annotation (steps 1–2) and
the annotation process (step 3).

3.1 Task 1: Relevance, Type, and Logic

Given a complex reasoning question and a CoT
answer, the first task involves annotating the chain
step-by-step, labeling the following information for
each step: relevance, step type and logical correctStep
1: Reasoning Chain Generation. We use
four open-domain complex-reasoning QA datasets
to elicit model-generated reasoning chains:

4
1. STRATEGYQA (Geva et al., 2021): Yes/no questions
that require a diverse set of reasoning skills
and applying implicit knowledge.

REVEAL-Eval REVEAL-Open
Questions 704 205
CoT answers 1002 224
CoT steps 3360 847
Avg. steps per CoT 3.4 5.1
Attribution steps 1979 485
Step-evidence pairs 3502 745
Avg. evidence length (words) 103 103
Logic steps 1250 306
Fully attributable
step-evidence pairs 864 –
Logically correct steps 1063 –
Fully correct CoT answers 200 –

2. MUSIQUE (Trivedi et al., 2022): Multi-hop reasoning
questions with free-text entity answers,
generated based on paragraphs from Wikipedia.
For our dataset, we consider the subset of 2-hop
questions, as we found qualitatively that the 3-
hop and 4-hop questions are often unnatural and
hard to understand.

3. SPORTS UNDERSTANDING (Srivastava et al.,
2023): Yes/no questions that require reasoning
about knowledge on sports players, leagues, and
sports maneuvers.

Table 1: Quantities for various properties of REVEAL.

practical and realistic distribution.

4. FERMI (Kalyan et al., 2021): Estimation questions
with numerical answers that require both
knowledge and reasoning to answer. The
questions are designed to have no clear gold
answers—they are exercises of common-sense
reasoning and numerical estimation, e.g., “How
much water does a school use in a week?”

Step 2: Evidence Retrieval. For attribution verification,
we use Wikipedia as an external knowledge
source and retrieve three paragraphs for each attribution
step. StrategyQA, MuSiQue, and Sports
Understanding are well-supported by Wikipedia,
while Fermi is explicitly designed to be difficult to
support, giving a variety of cases. To promote the
retrieval of supporting paragraphs, we mix dense
retrieval and lexical-based retrieval, fetching two
paragraphs with GTR (Ni et al., 2021) and one with
BM25 (Zaragoza et al., 2004). In addition, retrieval
is done using decontextualized versions of the CoT
steps, generated by the decontextualization model
of Choi et al. (2021) which replaces co-referenced
pronouns with explicit entity mentions.

Examples from each source are provided in Tab. 5
(§A). This diverse set of tasks provides a variety of

question types, knowledge and reasoning requirements,
and answer formats (binary, numerical and
free-text entities). The questions were sampled randomly
from the evaluation sets of each dataset and
evenly split across the four datasets.

We use three different LMs to generate CoT
answers: Flan-PaLM-540B (Chung et al., 2022),
GPT-3 (text-davinci-003, Brown et al., 2020) and
Flan-UL2-20B (Tay et al., 2023). We prioritized
a variety in the models, with two large-size highperforming
models with different pretraining data,
and one smaller-size, weaker model, in order to
gather a variety of CoT answers. CoT prompt
demonstrations were written according to standard
practices (Wei et al., 2023), with in-domain examples
for each dataset taken from the dataset’s training
set, and designed to be simple and informative.
A subset of the questions from each dataset (onefourth)
were answered by all three models with
three separate CoT answers, to serve as a base for
analyses that require multiple answers per question,
while the rest were answered by each model once
in equal proportions (one-fourth each). Our goal in
this methodology was to maximize the flexibility
of the dataset and potential for analyses and evaluations,
for as many LMs and verifiers as possible.
Specifically, we aimed to collect a sufficient variety
of answers, both correct and incorrect, from a

Step 3: Annotation. We use a pool of 13 Englishspeaking
annotators, and collect 5 annotations per
question and its corresponding CoT answer, for
each of our two tasks (see §3). A small portion
of the labels (approx. 5%) were annotated by the
authors of this work (3 annotations per sub-task),
to fill any gaps in examples that were not fully
annotated for technical reasons.

Justifications and Quality Validation. Each annotation
in REVEAL is accompanied by a free-text
justification written by its annotator. Those justifications
serve two goals: they allow us to easily
monitor the annotation process by leaning into the
annotators thought process and provide them with
meaningful feedback (Nangia et al., 2021), and
serve as a valuable resource on their own which
we leave to be explored in future work. We maintained
a high level of quality for these justifications,
such that they do not collapse to templated answers
or provide insufficient information. Examples of
these justifications are given in Fig. 4.

5
Required number of evidence passages
to find support or contradiction

Attribution labels
for CoT steps

Attribution labels
for step-evidence pairs

Not found
38.6%

Unsupported
38.6%
Fully
Attributable
43.8%

Unsupported
65.4%

Contradictory
6.5%

1
53.2% 2
5.4%
3
2.8%

Partially Attributable
3.4%

 Contradictory
 11.5%

Fully Attributable
24.7%

Partially Attributable
6.1%

Figure 5: Statistics for the attribution task in REVEAL-Eval (§5). Left: Label distributions for each step or stepevidence
pair. Right: Statistics for the number of retrieved evidence passages for each attribution step until a
supporting or contradicting evidence was found (up to 3).

In addition, we performed three pilot rounds
for annotator selection, annotator training, and
task improvement, all to maintain a high quality
bar for the collected dataset (the pilot annotations
were discarded from the final dataset). Finally,
we split the dataset into two subsets, REVEAL-Eval
and REVEAL-Open, where the latter
contains low-confidence labels that received lower
inter-annotator agreement (see §5).

(A) By Dataset

18.8%
(B) By CoT Model

32.4%
3.6%

StrategyQA
MuSiQue
Sports
Fermi

GPT-3

Flan-PaLM

25.0%

Subset

Subset

21.5%
17.8%

11.5%

Flan-UL2

Figure 6: Comparison of full CoT correctness across
subsets in REVEAL-Eval, meaning that all steps in the
CoT are fully attributable and logically correct. (B) only
includes questions answered by all models, where all
answer CoTs are in REVEAL-Eval.

5 REVEAL

We ran the data collection protocol described in
the previous section to obtain our dataset, REVEAL.
In terms of inter-annotator agreement, we report a
Krippendorf’s α of 0.49 for attribution steps and
0.46 for logical steps.

LM generators. We release all five annotations for
each label in the dataset, including anonymized annotator
identifiers for each label, to support future
annotation methodology research and reproducibility
(Sandri et al., 2023).

We split REVEAL into two subsets, as we observe
that some reasoning chains are very challenging
to annotate because of ambiguity or other
factors (analyzed in §5.2). Any CoT answer with
at least one step that has low inter-annotator agreement
is treated as an indecisive case, which applies
to 18% of the CoT answers. A step is considered to
have “low inter-annotator agreement” if less than
three annotators agree on any single label for attribution
or logical correctness (for example, an
attribution step labeled as “partially attributable”
by two annotators, “fully attributable” by one annotator,
and “contradictory” by two annotators). We
release these examples separately in a data subset
called REVEAL-Open, as they are valuable instances
of difficult or borderline cases, and the rest
of the examples in a subset called REVEAL-Eval.
Since the annotations in REVEAL-Open are indecisive,
in §6 we evaluate only on REVEAL-Eval.

Considering the label distributions, 98.6% of
steps are relevant to answer the question, and 87.5%
of logic steps are logically correct. Fig. 5 (left)
shows label distributions for attribution steps and
step–evidence pairs (note that partial attribution is
considered as “not enough info” in standard NLI
formalization). While 43.8% of attribution steps
were fully attributable, this is still relatively low,
which may point at attribution as a main obstacle in
reasoning. However, we do note that unsupported
steps are not necessarily incorrect, as lack of support
may stem from wrong claims, but also from
issues in retrieving relevant supporting evidence.
We analyze this further in §5.1.

Fig. 5 (right) shows the distribution for the required
number of evidence paragraphs for finding
support or contradiction for each step: In the majority
of cases where support was found, it was
already present in the first retrieved paragraph.

Tab. 1 details statistics on the two data splits,
showing that REVEAL-Eval has several hundreds to
thousands of examples for each setting to support
reliable evaluation. Instances are approximately
distributed uniformly across source datasets and

Fig. 6 shows distributions for full chain-level
attribution and correctness for each subset of the
data. In terms of specific types of errors in the
CoTs: 77.3% of CoTs in REVEAL-Eval have a step
which is not fully attributable, while 18.5% have a

6
step which is logically incorrect.

Complexity Category Attribution steps
(N=199)

Logic steps

(N=52)
Approximating and hedging 1.51% –
Averages and ranges 10.05% –
Calculation or unit issue – 42.31%
Specialized knowledge 13.07% 7.69%
Formatting issue 3.02% –
Unclear reference 12.56% 30.77%
Inference across claims in evidence 1.51% –
Invalid inference in previous step 0.50% 28.85%
Insufficient hedging 13.07% –
Rating category definition/criterion 23.62% –
Relevance dispute – 23.08%
Temporal inconsistency 9.55% 1.92%
World knowledge 25.63% 15.38%

5.1 Analysis of Unsupported Claims
A large fraction of the labeled steps was found unsupported
by the retrieved evidence (38.6%, Fig. 5).
To understand this, we conduct a qualitative analysis
of 40 unsupported steps (10 from each source
dataset, randomly sampled). For each step, we first
verify whether the step is factually correct. For
correct steps, we analyzed whether the issue was
due to irrelevant retrieved evidence, or due to other
reasons. See §A for full details.

Of the 40 unsupported steps, 19 were indeed
not factual. Of the remaining 21: In 13 steps the

Table 2: Percentage of steps per complexity category in

REVEAL-Open. A step can match multiple categories.
For more details see §A.

retrieved evidence was relevant, but additional reasoning
and world knowledge was required to verify
them (e.g., which teams are part of the spanish “LaLiga”,
or that “ACM” stands for “Association for
Computing Machinery”). In 6 steps the retrieved
evidence was irrelevant. In 1 step there were two

inference in a previous step.

We conjecture that improvements to the annotation
instructions could help to minimize some of
the categories, despite our efforts to make revisions
during the pilot phases to achieve this effect. In
particular, additional guidance can assist decisions
on when and how to apply world knowledge, and

claims within the given step, but only one was supported
by the evidence, and in 1 step the evidence
was irrelevant due to insufficient decontextualization
(“Brown” ref. “Jaylen Brown”).

clarify distinction between attribution labels. Recruiting
annotators with appropriate domain knowledge
for the main subjects of a given dataset (e.g.,
sports or sciences) could also reduce the number of
disagreements related to both the content and the
standards of comparison or equivalence.

From this analysis, we estimate that roughly half
of the unsupported cases stem from using imperfect
retrieval. Additional challenges such as imperfect
decontextualization and requiring to reason over
multiple evidence passages can also slightly contribute
to failing to support factually correct claims.

6 Experiments

5.2 Analysis of REVEAL-Open

We use REVEAL to evaluate existing methods for
CoT verification, on step-level verification (§6.1)
and CoT-level verification (§6.2).

REVEAL-Open consists of questions paired with
answers in which at least one of the steps has low
inter-annotator agreement, defined as a case where
no more than two (out of five) annotators agree on
a single label for that step. Tab. 2 summarizes our
analysis of the low-agreement cases. We inspected
each of these steps (including the underlying data,
as well as annotators’ individual labels and written
feedback) and report a qualitative description of
the complications that may have contributed to the
low agreement. On the basis of these qualitative

Verifiers. We use Flan-UL2 (20B), Flan-PaLM
(540B), PaLM-2-L (Anil et al., 2023) and GPT-3
(text-davinci-003) for LM baselines in few-shot
prompting settings (prompt templates detailed in
§B). In addition, we use two specialized baselines:
a T5-based model with 11B parameters trained
on a mixture of NLI datasets (Honovich et al.,
2022), and FacTool—a GPT-3-based fact-checking
pipeline (Chern et al., 2023).

notes, we devise 13 broader categories and manually
assign one or more categories to each step.

For the prompting-based baselines, we use the
label generated by the LM as the predicted class
(which always matched to one of the task labels in
our experiments). The NLI classifier receives as
input a premise and hypothesis and predicts a score
between 0 and 1 that indicates if the hypothesis is
entailed by the premise or not. FacTool returns a
binary factuality classification label, and we use it

The most frequent complication categories for
attribution steps are world knowledge or general
inference, rating category definition/criterion,
and specialized knowledge and insufficient nuance/hedging
tied. For logical steps, the most frequent
categories are calculation or unit issue, inconsistent/unclear
reference or standard, and invalid

7
Baseline Attribution
2-class
Attribution
3-class Logic Type
Flan-UL2-20B 65.2 50.4 59.4 27.3
Flan-PaLM-540B 85.1 66.0 68.6 51.2
PaLM-2-L 85.9 70.7 77.6 64.1
GPT-3 81.4 51.3 59.4 52.3
FacTool 71.1 – – –
t5-xxl-true 88.4 55.0 47.3 –

Baseline Single decision Pipeline

Flan-UL2-20B 41.5 54.4
Flan-PaLM-540B 39.4 58.1
PaLM-2-L 61.9 76.4
GPT-3 35.6 71.9

Table 4: Macro-F1 for the CoT correctness task (§6).
This task involves only specifying whether a CoT is
correct or not, regardless of the exact error. The pipeline
variants use the step-level decisions (relevance, type,
attribution and logic tasks) to check whether an incorrect
step exists in the CoT.

Class balance 76:24 70:24:6 80:20 59:40:1

Table 3: Macro-F1 for all step-level tasks in §6. Performance
is measured across steps.

only for the attribution task.

question. All prompting-based baselines were biased
towards a “logically correct” classification,
achieving high F1 on the “correct” class (>85%)
and low F1 on the “incorrect” class (~33-47%).
The T5 NLI baseline shows a bias towards the
“incorrect” class, but performs significantly worse
overall. This indicates that NLI fine-tuning with
simple factual claims does not generalize to out-ofdomain
complex logical structures.

Evaluation. As few-shot evaluation is noisy
(Perez et al., 2021; Jacovi et al., 2023b), we average
the predictions of the LM baselines over
5 different 8-shot prompts, sampled in random
order from 13 demonstrations for each sub-task,
which we wrote for this purpose (the number of
demonstrations is trimmed if it exceeds a given
model’s context length). All sets of demonstrations
were class-balanced and balanced across source
datasets and labels. Prompt templates are available
in §B. For FacTool, we insert the appropriate evidence
from the dataset, instead of allowing FacTool
to retrieve evidence separately, for compatibility
with the attribution labels. We release the prompt
demonstrations alongside the dataset.

Step type. The task here is to classify whether a
CoT step is an attribution step, logic step, or both,
given the input question and its full answer. All
models struggled with this task, achieving macroF1
below 65%.

6.2 CoT-level Verification
This task involves verifying whether the CoT correctly
justifies the answer or not—without necessarily
specifying which step contains which type
of error. Results are in Tab. 4. We report on two
implementations of each LM baseline: (1) Pipeline
implementations are decisions by combining the
LM’s decision on each step separately according to
the step-level task predictions in §6.1. (2) Singledecision
implementations are by prompting the LM
to classify (in few-shot) whether a CoT is a correct
answer to a question or not, given the question,
CoT answer, and evidence paragraphs. The class
balance for this task is 80:20 (incorrect CoTs being
the majority class).

6.1 Step-level Verification

Given the unbalanced class distribution, we report
macro-F1 performance in Tab. 3 (class F1 results
are in §B). Results for the step relevance task (classifying
if a step is relevant for answering the question)
are omitted, as all the models collapsed to the
majority baseline, leading to an F1 of near-0.

Step attribution. In this task, the model receives
as input a decontextualized version of a CoT
step and a Wikipedia evidence paragraph. There
are two variants: 2-class—classifying whether the

step is entailed or not by the evidence; 3-class—
classifying between full entailment, contradiction,
or not enough info. The best-performing model in
2-class was the T5-based classifier, which is much
smaller than the other models although fine-tuned
on large NLI data. 3-class performance follows
scaling laws, which shows that detecting contradictions
is a difficult problem.

When observing macro-F1 performance, the
pipeline variants significantly outperform singledecision
in all cases. The gap appears to stem from
a significantly higher F1 on the incorrect class (35-
55% vs. 80-87%), while the correct class receives
low F1 for both variants (30-56%). Overall, all
baselines struggled with the high-level task of CoT
verification, showing significant room for improveStep
logic. This task is to classify if a given step
is logically entailed by the previous steps and the

8
ment on REVEAL and on CoT verification.

with attribution, but in contrast, CoT verifiers struggle
more with verifying logical correctness.

7 Related Work

9 Limitations

While CoT prompting (Wei et al., 2023) has originally
emerged as a simple prompting technique
to increase performance of the “final” answer to
the question, it has subsequently been interpreted
as a part of the answer to be verified for correctness
itself (Golovneva et al., 2023). As part of this
narrative, various methods have been proposed to
verify reasoning chains, either for LM evaluation
(Welleck et al., 2022), improvement (Chen et al.,
2023) or for training (Lightman et al., 2023). To
our knowledge, no current work provides a fully
labeled benchmark of reasoning chain correctness
in information-seeking tasks.

Evidence retrieval. Our work focuses on evaluation
of verifiers that receive evidence as input—i.e.,
in the task of attribution to a given source, rather
than the task of fact-checking where evidence retrieval
is explicitly part of the task. As such, we can
only evaluate verifiers that also operate on specific
given evidence, rather than fact-chekers that perform
evidence retrieval themselves. Additionally,
for some of the knowledge claims in the dataset
labeled as “unsupported”, it is possible that there
exists evidence that will support or contradict them,
which our retriever did not surface. We note, however,
that the goal of the dataset is to simply collect
a sufficiently wide variety of cases on which to
evaluate verifiers, rather than to evaluate the CoT
itself using an “ideal” retriever, and the labels in the
dataset are well-defined for the specific evidence
passages used.

Recent work on verification of reasoning chains
primarily focuses on methods of verification and
metrics: Golovneva et al. (2023) propose a suite
of metrics for CoT quality, including knowledge
attribution and logical correctness (both formalized
as instances of NLI), grammaticality, informativeness,
and so on. They provide a set of examples
in math QA, closed-domain QA, and NLI, annotated
in various quality metrics. Prasad et al. (2023)
propose evaluating for informativeness and logical
correctness in math QA and closed-domain QA settings.
Ott et al. (2023) collect a variety of existing
gold-reference human-written CoTs from existing
datasets, and provide a web-interface annotation
tool for annotating CoTs for errors in logical inference,
factual knowledge, verbosity and reading
comprehension. Lightman et al. (2023) provide a
large dataset of math QA with step-level annotations
for mathematical correctness of CoTs by one
LM, primarily for training.

Fermi and Wikipedia evidence. We retrieve
evidence against Wikipedia, in the interest of having
clean and reliable evidence, and due to the
fact that StrategyQA, MuSiQue and Sports Understanding
are sufficiently addressed by Wikipedia
knowledge. However, Fermi is a dataset which
is explicitly designed to require knowledge that is
difficult to attribute or measure, and require difficult
inference for both knowledge and logic claims.
As such, Fermi is by design not well-addressed by
Wikipedia retrieval. We chose Fermi as one of our
four datasets in order to have sufficient variety in
the data for claims that are very difficult to support.

8 Conclusion

Reasoning chains in formats other than Chainof-Thought.
Our dataset uses CoT as a writing
style for reasoning chains, due to its popularity
and sentence structure that allows convenient step
separation. It is of course possible to reason about
complex questions in other ways, such as using
sentences that combine multiple facts together, or
claims that combine knowledge and logic together,
and so on. Such examples can be considered a
more difficult case for reasoning verification, as
they will potentially require an additional solution
for extracting atomic claims from the reasoning
chain. CoT-format chains, such as in our dataset,
do not have this requirement.

We design a methodology for human verification
of reasoning chains, and employ it to annotate a
dataset of CoT-format reasoning chains generated
by three LMs in open-domain complex-reasoning
QA tasks. The dataset, REVEAL, can be used to
benchmark automatic verifiers of LM reasoning.
Our work advances the research towards LMs that
can provide correct and attributable reasoning behind
their decisions. We find that CoTs generated
by LMs are often not fully correct, and that automatic
verifiers struggle to verify them appropriately.
In particular, between attribution and logic types
of correctness, CoT-generating LMs struggle more

9
Acknowledgments

632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

We thank Eran Ofek for his assistance in providing
expert annotations, and to Idan Szpektor and Avi

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie

Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR,
abs/2005.14165.

Caciularu for providing helpful feedback throughout
the project. We are grateful to the annotators
who provided labeling judgments and useful feedback
throughout the annotation process.

References

Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak
Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng
Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark, Laurent El
Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav
Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark Omernick, Kevin
Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao,
Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang, Gustavo Hernandez
Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham,
Jan Botha, James Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma,
Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin
Cherry, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa
Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz,
Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu
Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia,
Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy GurAri,
Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua

Justin Chih-Yao Chen, Swarnadeep Saha, and Mohit

Bansal. 2023. Reconcile: Round-table conference
improves reasoning via consensus among diverse
llms.

I-Chun Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan,
Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, Graham
Neubig, Pengfei Liu, et al. 2023. Factool: Factuality
detection in generative ai–a tool augmented
framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528.

Eunsol Choi, Jennimaria Palomaki, Matthew Lamm,
Tom Kwiatkowski, Dipanjan Das, and Michael

Collins. 2021. Decontextualization: Making sentences
stand-alone. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 9:447–461.

Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz,
Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski,
Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin
Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li,
Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu,
Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru,
Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem,
Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom,
Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek,
Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif,
Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko
Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee
Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R.
So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter,
Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,
Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wieting,
Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven
Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav
Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. 2023. Palm 2 technical
report.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek
Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar
Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia,
Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,
Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew
M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai,
Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira,
Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee,
Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy
Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov,
and Noah Fiedel. 2022. Palm: Scaling language modeling
with pathways.

Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural
language processing with Python: analyzing text
with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media,
Inc.".

Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret

Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert
Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai,
Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson,
Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams

Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,

and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large annotated
corpus for learning natural language inference.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages

10
Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai,
Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob
Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le,
and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned
language models.

Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical
problem solving with the math dataset.
ArXiv, abs/2103.03874.

Or Honovich, Roee Aharoni, Jonathan Herzig, Hagai

Taitelbaum, Doron Kukliansy, Vered Cohen, Thomas
Scialom, Idan Szpektor, Avinatan Hassidim, and
Yossi Matias. 2022. TRUE: Re-evaluating factual
consistency evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 3905–3920, Seattle,
United States. Association for Computational Linguistics.Karl
Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training verifiers to solve math word problems.
CoRR, abs/2110.14168.

Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges, Evaluating
Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classification
and Recognizing Textual Entailment, First
PASCAL Machine Learning Challenges Workshop,
MLCW 2005, Southampton, UK, April 11-13, 2005,
Revised Selected Papers, volume 3944 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 177–190. Springer.

Yushi Hu, Otilia Stretcu, Chun-Ta Lu, Krishnamurthy

Viswanathan, Kenji Hata, Enming Luo, Ranjay Krishna,
and Ariel Fuxman. 2023. Visual program distillation:
Distilling tools and programmatic reasoning
into vision-language models.

Alon Jacovi, Avi Caciularu, Omer Goldman, and Yoav
Goldberg. 2023a. Stop uploading test data in plain
text: Practical strategies for mitigating data contamination
by evaluation benchmarks.

Bhavana Dalvi, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Zhengnan
Xie, Hannah Smith, Leighanna Pipatanangkura, and
Peter Clark. 2021. Explaining answers with entailment
trees. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 7358–7370, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Alon Jacovi, Avi Caciularu, Jonathan Herzig, Roee

Aharoni, Bernd Bohnet, and Mor Geva. 2023b. A
comprehensive evaluation of tool-assisted generation
strategies. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2023, pages 13856–
13878, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, Panupong Pasupat, Anthony
Chen, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Yicheng Fan, Vincent
Zhao, Ni Lao, Hongrae Lee, Da-Cheng Juan, and
Kelvin Guu. 2023. RARR: Researching and revising
what language models say, using language models.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 16477–16508, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman,
Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, and
Yejin Choi. 2022. Maieutic prompting: Logically
consistent reasoning with recursive explanations. In
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1266–1279, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot,

Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Did Aristotle
Use a Laptop? A Question Answering Benchmark
with Implicit Reasoning Strategies. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(TACL).

Ashwin Kalyan, Abhinav Kumar, Arjun Chandrasekaran,
Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. 2021.
How much coffee was consumed during EMNLP
2019? fermi problems: A new reasoning challenge
for AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 7318–7328, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics.Olga
Golovneva, Moya Chen, Spencer Poff, Martin

Corredor, Luke Zettlemoyer, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi,
and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2023. ROSCOE: A suite of
metrics for scoring step-by-step reasoning. In The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
2023. OpenReview.net.

Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. 2018.
Scitail: A textual entailment dataset from science
question answering. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1).

Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos.
2022. A survey on automated fact-checking.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 10:178–206.

Lev Konstantinovskiy, Oliver Price, Mevan Babakar,
and Arkaitz Zubiaga. 2018. Towards automated
factchecking: Developing an annotation schema and
benchmark for consistent automated claim detection.
CoRR, abs/1809.08193.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul

Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Xiaodong

11
Archiki Prasad, Swarnadeep Saha, Xiang Zhou, and

Andrew K. Lampinen, Nicholas A. Roy, Ishita Dasgupta,

Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Allison C. Tam, James L. McClelland,
Chen Yan, Adam Santoro, Neil C. Rabinowitz,
Jane X. Wang, and Felix Hill. 2022. Tell
me why! explanations support learning relational
and causal structure. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pages 11868–11890.
PMLR.

Mohit Bansal. 2023. ReCEval: Evaluating reasoning
chains via correctness and informativeness. In Proceedings
of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 10066–
10086, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt,
Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring
and narrowing the compositionality gap in language
models.

Christoph Leiter, Piyawat Lertvittayakumjorn,
M. Fomicheva, Wei Zhao, Yang Gao, and Steffen
Eger. 2022. Towards explainable evaluation
metrics for natural language generation. ArXiv,
abs/2203.11131.

Hannah Rashkin, Vitaly Nikolaev, Matthew Lamm,

Michael Collins, Dipanjan Das, Slav Petrov, Gaurav
Singh Tomar, Iulia Turc, and David Reitter. 2021.
Measuring attribution in natural language generation
models. CoRR, abs/2112.12870.

Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen,
Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2023. Making
language models better reasoners with step-aware
verifier. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5315–5333, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marta Sandri, Elisa Leonardelli, Sara Tonelli, and Elisabetta
Jezek. 2023. Why don’t you do it right?
analysing annotators’ disagreement in subjective
tasks. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 2428–2441, Dubrovnik,
Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri

Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John
Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023.
Let’s verify step by step.

Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, and Regina Barzilay. 2021.
Get your vitamin C! robust fact verification with
contrastive evidence. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, pages 624–643, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Nikita Nangia, Saku Sugawara, Harsh Trivedi, Alex

Warstadt, Clara Vania, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2021.
What ingredients make for an effective crowdsourcing
protocol for difficult NLU data collection tasks?
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
1221–1235, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao,
Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya
Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska,
Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power,
Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Kocurek,
Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish,
Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda Askell,
Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane,
Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders Andreassen, Andrea
Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew
Dai, Andrew La, Andrew Lampinen, Andy
Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong,
Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli,
Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum,
Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov,
Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia
Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karaka¸s, B. Ryan Roberts,
Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartłomiej Bojanowski,
Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam
Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk
Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Bryan
Orinion, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine
Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramírez,
Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng,
Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris
Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Manning,
Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera,
Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft,
Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan

Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo
Hernández Ábrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Y. Zhao,
Yi Luan, Keith B. Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, and Yinfei
Yang. 2021. Large dual encoders are generalizable
retrievers.

Juri Opitz and Anette Frank. 2021. Towards a decomposable
metric for explainable evaluation of text generation
from AMR. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pages
1504–1518, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Simon Ott, Konstantin Hebenstreit, Valentin Liévin,

Christoffer Egeberg Hother, Milad Moradi, Maximilian
Mayrhauser, Robert Praas, Ole Winther, and
Matthias Samwald. 2023. Thoughtsource: A central
hub for large language model reasoning data.

Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2021.
True few-shot learning with language models. CoRR,
abs/2105.11447.

12
Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman,
Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí

Nick Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas

Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan

González, Danielle Perszyk, Danny Hernandez,
Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan,
David Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta,
Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko, Deniz

Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar Elbaghdadi,
Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno

Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung, Paul Pu Liang,
Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao,
Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon

Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes,
Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho Mollo,
Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dylan Schrader, Ekaterina
Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal, Eleanor

Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Miłkowski, Piyush Patil,
Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing
Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta
Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ramon
Risco, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard
Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe
Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman
Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan LeBras, Rosanne

Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie
Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola, Emma Lam, Eric Chu,
Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi,
Ethan Dyer, Ethan Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu
Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia,
Fatemeh Siar, Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Francesca
Happé, Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav

Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan

Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán
Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio
Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo JaimovitchLópez,
Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijasevic,
Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry Shevlin,
Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang,
Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet,
Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon
Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac, James B. Simon,
James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Kocon,´
Jana Thompson, Janelle Wingfield, Jared Kaplan,
Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang,
Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova,
Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen

Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad,
Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer,
Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman,
Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev
Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan
Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian

Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava,
Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang
Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal,
Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima, Debnath,
Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi,
Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini, Soo-Hwan Lee,
Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene,
Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella Biderman,
Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi,
Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana
Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal

Taal, Jesse Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming
Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden,
John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Batchelder,
Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, Jose

Hernandez-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Guerr,
Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule,
Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl

Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto,
Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild,
Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo

Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva,
Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel,
Kevin Omondi, Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo,
Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell,
Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao,
Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia ContrerasOchando,
Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella,
Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng
He, Luis Oliveros Colón, Luke Metz, Lütfi Kerem
¸Senel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap, Maartje ter
Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas
Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco

Schick, Timofei Kornev, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg,
Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar
Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera
Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay

Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar,
Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders,
William Zhang, Wout Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu
Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen,
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song,
Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding
Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang

Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian
Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu.
2023. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and
extrapolating the capabilities of language models.

Maru, Maria Jose Ramírez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn,
Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast,
Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert,
Medina Orduna Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud,
Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen,
Michael Gu, Michael Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt,
Michael Strube, Michał Sw˛edrowski, Michele
Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike

Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. 2018. The web as

a knowledge-base for answering complex questions.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North

Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker,
Mo Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor
Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun
Peng, Nathan A. Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari

American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 641–651, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.Krakover,
Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts,

13
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Vinh Q. Tran, Xavier
Garcia, Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Hyung Won
Chung, Siamak Shakeri, Dara Bahri, Tal Schuster,
Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Denny Zhou, Neil Houlsby,
and Donald Metzler. 2023. Ul2: Unifying language
learning paradigms.

Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu,
and Noah A. Smith. 2023. How language model
hallucinations can snowball.

James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers), pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multihop
questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V.
Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency
improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali,
Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and
Denny Zhou. 2023. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits
reasoning in large language models.

Johannes Welbl, Pontus Stenetorp, and Sebastian Riedel.
2018. Constructing datasets for multi-hop reading
comprehension across documents. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:287–
302.

Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ximing Lu, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, and Yejin Choi. 2022. Naturalprover:
Grounded mathematical proof generation with language
models. ArXiv, abs/2205.12910.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence
understanding through inference. In Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.Hugo
Zaragoza, Nick Craswell, Michael Taylor, Suchi
Saria, and Stephen Robertson. 2004. Microsoft cambridge
at trec-13: Web and hard tracks. In IN PROCEEDINGS
OF TREC 2004.

Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah D.
Goodman. 2022. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with
reasoning.

14
A REVEAL: Extended Details

Reveal Dataset - Source Task Split

Here we provide additional details for the collected
dataset and the collection process.

Fermi

MuSiQue

21.9%

27.5%

A.1 Source Data Collection
Tab. 5 shows examples from each of the four source
datasets, alongside example answers and their correctness.
These examples are shown here for illustration,
and were used as part of the pilot annotation
phases, so they are not examples from the final
REVEAL dataset.

StrategyQA
24.4%

Sports
26.3%

Reveal Dataset - CoT Generators' Split

To generate CoT answers, we constructed a separate
prompt for each dataset, using examples from
its training set with verified (correct) CoTs. StrategyQA,
MuSiQue and Fermi provide gold-reference
solutions (in non-CoT format) that we used to write
the prompt CoT demonstrations. For Sports Understanding,
we wrote the CoT demonstrations given
the gold answer from the dataset. The CoT prompts
used 6 demonstrations (question and CoT answer
pairs) each.

Flan-PaLM
33.1%

GPT-3
33.5%

Flan-UL2
33.4%

Figure 7: Distributions in REVEAL for the source tasks
and CoT generators, which are approximately balanced.

only makes logical inferences based on the
question or previous steps. (C) Both. The
step introduces new information and makes a
logical inference.

CoT answers were split into sentences using
NLTK’s sentence tokenizer (Bird et al., 2009), and
each sentence was considered one reasoning step.
For purposes of retrieval they were decontextualized
with the decontextualization model by Choi
et al. (2021). The evidence paragraphs were retrieved
from a 2021 image of Wikipedia. The
evidence paragraphs in the dataset have on average
103 words, and the longest paragraph has 582
words.

3. Logic: Considering only the logical inference

done in step i, is it consistent with the previous
steps? (A) Yes, correct inference. The
inferences that the step makes based on the
question or previous steps is correct. (B) No,
incorrect inference. The inferences that the
step makes based on the question or previous
steps is incorrect.

A.2 Annotation Questionnaire
We split the annotation into two tasks, one focused
on the logic annotation (including relevance, step
type and logical correctness ratings), and the other
focused on the attribution annotations (including
relevance and step-evidence attribution). The annotation
interfaces are shown in Fig. 8.

4. Justification: Provide a justification for your
ratings.

Task 2 is implemented and phrased as follows:

1. Relevance: Should claim i be attributed? (A)
Yes, it’s necessary to attribute the claim. The
claim has information that needs to be verified.
(B) No, it’s unnecessary to attribute the claim.
The claim doesn’t have any information that
requires verification.

Task 1 is implemented and phrased as follows:

1. Relevance: Is step i relevant to answering
the question? (A) Yes, it is relevant. The
information in this step might be helpful to
answer the question. (B) No, it’s not relevant.
The information in this step is not helpful to
answer the question.

2. Attribution: To what extent can the information
in claim i be verified by evidence j? (A)
Fully. Strictly according to the cited evidence,
the claim is correct. (B) Partially. All important
information in the claim is supported
(no contradiction), but some information is

2. Type: Does step i bring new information or

describes a logical step? (A) Attribution step.
The step brings new information to help answer
the question. (B) Logic step. The step

15
Source Data Question Answer Error
StrategyQA Would a black widow have use for
peaches?
A black widow is a spider. Peaches are a fruit. Thus,
a black widow would have use for peaches. So the
answer is yes.
Logic (step 3)

StrategyQA Will more people go in and out of
Taco Bell than a Roy Rogers each
year?

Taco Bell is a fast food chain with thousands of
locations. Roy Rogers is a fast food chain with
fewer than 500 locations. Thus, more people will go
in and out of Taco Bell than Roy Rogers each year.
So the answer is yes.

Correct

MuSiQue Who is the other child of Chian
Hsiao-chang’s father?

Chian Hsiao-chang’s father is Chian Ching-kuo.
Chian Hsiao-chang’s other child is Chian Ching-wen.
So the final answer is: Chian Ching-wen.

Attribution (step 2),
logic (step 3)

MuSiQue Which New York City team does
not host NBA games at the site
where Jimmy Carter was nominated
for president?

Jimmy Carter was nominated for president at
Madison Square Garden in New York City. Madison
Square Garden is home to the New York Knicks, but
not the Brooklyn Nets. So the final answer is:
Brooklyn Nets.

Correct

Sports Is the following sentence plausible?
“Jamison Crowder changed
direction in the backfield.”

Jamison Crowder is a baseball player. Changing
direction in the backfield is part of American
football. So the answer is no.

Attribution (step 1)

Sports Is the following sentence plausible?
“Yoan Moncada beat the buzzer.”

Yoan Moncada is a baseball player. Beating out the
buzzer is part of basketball. So the answer is no.

Correct

Fermi What is the volume, cc, of blood in
a healthy new-born baby?

The mass of blood in a new born baby is 25 grams.
The density of blood is 0.994 g*cm**-3 or grams
per cc. Thus, the cc volume of blood in a new-born
baby is 25g / 0.994 g*cm**-3 = 25.15 cm**3. So
the final answer is: 25.15

Attribution (step 1)

Fermi What is the total US salary? The per capita income in the US is 63051 USD.

Correct

There are around 123e+6 full time employees in the
US. Thus, the total US salary is $ 63051 * 123e+6 =
7755273000000 USD. So the final answer is:
7755273000000

Table 5: Examples from each of the source datasets, alongside CoT answers, and their type of error.

unsupported. (C) Contradictory. Some information
in the claim is contradicted by the
cited evidence. (D) Unsupported. Some important
information (or more) in the claim is
not supported by the cited evidence (but no
contradiction).

and with 5 annotations per step—leading to an
expensive annotation process.

A.4 Analyses
Tab. 10 contains the full analysis for the properties
of unsupported attribution steps.

3. Justification: Provide a justification for your
attribution rating. What parts of the claim
are and are not supported by the evidence?
Feel free to paste parts of the response and the
source document as evidence.

B Experiments and Analyses

B.1 Experiment Details

In the few-shot evaluation settings, prompts were
constructed by randomly selecting 8 demonstrations
from class-balanced sets of 13 demonstrations.
Prompts were trimmed to the biggest number of
demonstrations which, combined with the query,
were under the context length for the given LM.
The demonstrations were taken from the training
sets of the source datasets, or from the examples
used for the pilot annotation phase (which were
discarded from the final REVEAL dataset).
The dataset used to train the T5-based classification
baseline is a compilation of multiple datasets:
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015), FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018), SciA.3
Additional Statistics

Distributions across source tasks and models are
shown in Fig. 7. To allow for a method of comparing
multiple CoT answers to the same question,
there are 161 questions which were answered by
all three models in the dataset. Of them, 96 have
all three CoT answers in REVEAL-Eval, while the
remainder 65 questions have one or more CoT answer
in REVEAL-Open.

Each step’s annotation took between 300 to 600
seconds, with some answers having 5 or more steps,

16
F1 (Attribution Task)
Fully attributable Not fully attributable

F1 (Logic Task)
Logically correct Logically incorrect

Baseline

Baseline

Flan-UL2-20B 51.9 70.3
Flan-PaLM-540B 78.8 91.3
PaLM-2-L 80.0 91.9
GPT-3 74.5 88.3
FacTool 62.5 79.7
T5-xxl-true 83.0 93.8

Flan-UL2-20B 85.1 33.8
Flan-PaLM-540B 90.2 47.1
PaLM-2-L 90.3 64.9
GPT-3 86.7 32.2
T5-xxl-true 57.6 37.1

Table 7: Baseline results for the logical correctness task.
The models classify the logical correctness of each step
given the previous steps.

Table 6: Baseline results for the attribution task. The
models classify each step-evidence pair.

Tail (Khot et al., 2018) and VitaminC (Schuster
et al., 2021).

F1 (Full Correctness)
Correct CoT Incorrect CoT

Baseline

B.2 Additional Results

Flan-UL2-20B (pipeline) 29.3 79.5
Flan-UL2-20B 29.3 54.0
Flan-PaLM-540B (pipeline) 31.9 84.3
Flan-PaLM-540B 40.2 38.6
PaLM-2-L (pipeline) 65.2 87.5
PaLM-2-L 51.4 72.4
GPT-3 (pipeline) 56.7 87.2
GPT-3 37.1 34.4

Per-class F1 metrics in all settings are shown in
Tables 6 to 8.

B.3 Prompt Templates
We describe here the template structures we used
for our few-shot verification prompts. We note
that we made an effort to test multiple templates
and settings, to make sure that an adequate effort
was allocated to implementing baselines that are as
strong as possible.
Attribution Task

Table 8: Baseline results for the task of classifying
the full correctness of a given CoT as an answer to a
question. The pipeline variants are classifiers built on
the models’ answers to each sub-task (relevance, type,
attribution and logic), while the non-pipeline variants
simply prompt the models to classify the entire CoT.

Premise: [evidence paragraph]
Hypothesis: [CoT step]

Evidence i: [evidence paragraph]
Question: [question]
Answer: [full CoT]

Output: {Entailment, Not Entailment}
Logic Task

Premise: [previous CoT steps]
Hypothesis: [CoT step]
Output: {Correct, Incorrect}
Step Type Task

The answer is: {Correct, Incorrect}
All evidences are added to the demonstration for
i in the number of evidences (i.e., the number of
attribution steps in the CoT).

Question: [question]
Answer: [full CoT]
Step: [CoT step]

Step type: {Attribution, Logic, Both}
Relevance Task

Question: [question]
Answer: [full CoT]
Step: [CoT step]

Is this step relevant to the answer? {Yes,
No}

CoT Correctness task

17
% steps in category
Description
Attribution
(N=199)
Logic
(N=52)

Complexity
Category

World knowledge
or general
inference
25.63% 15.38% Some annotators did not apply world knowledge or general implicit inferences that
other annotators take for granted (e.g., that a civil war takes place within a single
country, or that an animal described as having prey can be called a “predator”).
Acceptable
nuance/hedging
1.51% – Disagreement between annotators on strictness of hedged approximations in the
step. E.g., “There are around 7.5e+9 people in the world” where the evidence
mentions “7.55 billion”.
Insufficient
nuance/hedging
13.07% – A step mentions an approximation of some quantity in the evidence but without
appropriate hedging.
Averages and
ranges
10.05% – A step picks a specific point or subrange from a more general range or set of ranges
given in the evidence, and annotators disagree on whether the exemplification is
representative of the evidence.
Calculation or unit
issue
– 42.31% The step consists of a calculation or unit conversion which is difficult to verify.

Specialized
knowledge
13.07% 7.69% The step requires specialized knowledge, e.g., rules of a sports game or scientific
notation, which some annotations consider as world knowledge.
Formatting issue 3.02% – A problem in the annotation interface (e.g., truncation) made the claims impossible
to verify.
Inconsistent/unclear
reference or
standard
12.56% 30.77% A step makes an ambiguous reference. E.g., “Westworld was directed by Jonathan
Nolan” is paired with evidence on “Westworld TV series . . . with Nolan directing
the pilot episode”—Westworld could refer to the film, TV series, etc.
Inference across
claims in evidence
1.51% – Verifying the step requires drawing an implicit conclusion, which only some
annotators did—e.g., the step “Birds and mammals are different classes of animals”
is paired with evidence that describes characteristics of mammals, and mentions
that they “distinguish them from reptiles and birds”, which implies that they are in
different classes.
Invalid inference in
previous step
0.50% 28.85% Some annotators may have found it difficult to disentangle a current step’s inference
from any previous inferences that are invalid.
Rating category
definition/criterion
23.62% – Disagreements stemming from the distinction between “partially attributable” and
“not attributable” (despite guidance during the annotation instructions—more discussion
below).
Relevance dispute – 23.08% Borderline-relevant steps or difficult to follow steps can lead to disagreement on
the relevance label.
Temporal
inconsistency
9.55% 1.92% The step makes a claim that relies on a different time frame from that of the evidence
or other steps in the answer (e.g., present-tense in “Maradona is a soccer player”
where the evidence mentions “a former professional footballer”). Annotators’
acceptance of temporal inconsistencies may vary (e.g., the convention of using the
present tense to refer to a retired person’s most salient profession).

Table 9: An overview of the different categories we surface for the disagreements observed in REVEAL-Open.

18
In this task you will evaluate the attribution of a claim to given evidence. Refer to the full instructions with rating examples.

Question:
Context

2.1 To what extent can the information in the brown
colored claim be verified by Evidence 1? Examples
◉ Fully Strictly according to the cited evidence, the claim is correct.
◉ Partially. All important information in the claim is supported (no contradiction).
◉ Contradictory. Some information in the claim is contradicted by the cited
evidence.

Albany, Georgia has a population of 77,434.
Step 1:
Will the Albany in Georgia reach a hundred
thousand occupants before the one in New
York?

Albany, New York has a population of 98,356.
Step 2:

◉ Unsupported. Some important information (or more) in the claim is not
supported by the cited evidence (but no contradiction).
◉ I don’t understand. I don’t understand the claim/evidence or cannot make a
choice. 2.2 To what extent can the information in the brown
colored claim be verified by Evidence 2? Examples
◉ Fully Strictly according to the cited evidence, the claim is correct.
◉ Partially. All important information in the claim is supported (no contradiction).
◉ Contradictory. Some information in the claim is contradicted by the cited
evidence.

Thus, the Albany in New York is already over 100,000.
Step 3:

So the answer is no.
Step 4:

Evidence

Evidence 1

◉ Unsupported. Some important information (or more) in the claim is not
supported by the cited evidence (but no contradiction).
◉ I don’t understand. I don’t understand the claim/evidence or cannot make a
choice.

« Albany, Georgia » « Albany, Georgia, Demographics, City » As of the census of
2010, there were 77,434 people, 29,781 households, and 18,515 families residing
in the city. The population density was 1,385.5 people per square mile
(535.0/km2). There were 33,436 housing units at an average density of 577.3 per
square mile (222.9/km2). Source: htps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eifel_Tower

3. Provide a justification for your attribution rating. What
parts of the claim are and are not supported by the
evidence?

Evidence 2

Feel free to paste parts of the response and the source document
as evidence.

« Albany, Georgia » « Albany, Georgia » Albany (/ˈɔːlbəni/ AWL-bə-nee) is a city
in the U.S. state of Georgia. Located on the Flint River, it is the seat of Dougherty
County, and is the sole incorporated city in that county. Located in southwest
Georgia, it is the principal city of the Albany, Georgia metropolitan area. The
population was 77,434 at the 2010 U.S. Census, making it the

Evidence 3

« SKF-77,434 » « SKF-77,434 » SKF-77,434 is a drug which acts as a selective
dopamine D1 receptor partial agonist, and has stimulant and anorectic efects.
Unlike other D1 agonists with higher efcacy such as SKF-81,297 and 6-Br-APB,
SKF-77,434 does not maintain self-administration in animal studies, and so has
been researched as a potential treatment for cocaine addiction. Source:
htps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eifel_Tower

Submit

In this task you will evaluate the quality of the system reasoning steps given a question. Refer to the full instructions with rating examples.

Context

3. Considering only the logical inference done in step 3, is it
consistent with the previous steps? Examples
◉ Yes, correct inference. The inferences that the step makes based on the
question/previous steps is correct.
◉ No, incorrect inference. The inferences that the step makes based on the
question/previous steps is incorrect.

Question:

Albany, Georgia has a population of 77,434.
Step 1:
Will the Albany in Georgia reach a hundred
thousand occupants before the one in New
York?

4. Provide a justification for your ratings.

Albany, New York has a population of 98,356.
Step 2:

Thus, the Albany in New York is already over 100,000.
Step 3:

1. Does step 4 bring new information or describes a logical step?
Examples

So the answer is no.
Step 4:

◉ Attribution step. The step brings new information to help answer the question.
◉ Logical step. The step only makes logical inferences based on question/previous steps.
◉ Both. The step makes logical inference and introduces new information.

2. Is step 4 relevant to answering the question? Examples

● Yes, it is relevant. The information in this step might be helpful to answer the question.
● No, it’s not relevant. The information in this step is not helpful to answer the question.

3. Considering only the logical inference done in step 4, is it
consistent with the previous steps? Examples
◉ Yes, correct inference. The inferences that the step makes based on the
question/previous steps is correct.
◉ No, incorrect inference. The inferences that the step makes based on the
question/previous steps is incorrect.

Submit

Figure 8: The annotation interface for the two tasks: Attribution (above) and logic (below).

19
Dataset Step Factually
Correct?
Analysis

Fermi There are 1000 * 100 = 10000
pennies in 1 US dollar.

No Wrong math

Fermi Art Beat is a free, annual event in
South Bend, Indiana.
Yes The info could be found outside of Wikipedia, the retrieved
evidence was irrelevant.
Fermi The latent heat of vaporization of
steam is 540 cal/g.
Yes The info could be found outside of wikipedia, the retrieved
evidence was irrelevant.
Fermi The total volume of the oceans is
1.3e+21 liters.
No The total volume of the oceans is much more than 1.3e+12
liters. The retrieved evidence was relevant but did not mention
the answer explicitly (metric conversion was required).
Fermi The average American yard is 8000
square feet.
No Could not find evidence that mentions this number, and the
retrieved evidence was irrelevant.
Musique Jayantha Ketagoda is married to his
wife, Jaya.
No Could not find evidence that mentions this claim, and the retrieved
evidence was relevant to the entity but did not mention
the claim.
Musique Vibullia Alcia Agrippina’s child
was a proponent for the movement
called the ”Feminist Movement”.
No Could not find evidence that mentions this claim.

Musique The Almost are signed to the record
label called Almost Records.
No The claim is wrong, and the retrieved evidence was not relevant.
Could find evidence in wikipedia that refutes the claim.
Musique The most Champions League wins
between 1992 and 2013 were by the
Spanish La Liga.
Yes The claim is correct, but requires complex reasoning (understanding
which teams are from the Spanish La Liga). The
retrieved evidence was related to La Liga but not sufficient to
support the claim.
Musique Deborah Estrin is a member of the
Association for Computing
Machinery.
Yes The claim is correct. There was evidence that supported
the claim, but this required domain knowledge (that
“ACM”=“Association for Computing Machinery”) so the raters
marked it as unsupported.
Sports Doing a maradona on the defender
is part of basketball.
No The claim is wrong, “a maradona” is a soccer move, not a
basketball move.
Sports Hitting the back of the rim is a
common occurrence in basketball.
Yes The claim is correct. None of the evidence supported it directly,
as it is more “common knowledge”.
Sports Windmill dunk is part of basketball,
not hockey.
Yes The claim is correct, however it is a composite claim - 1)
Windmill dunk is part of basketball 2) Windmill dunk is not
part of hockey. The evidence supported the first claim, not the
second.
Sports Brown is a basketball player. Yes The claim is correct, but requires further decontextualization
(from “Brown” to “Jaylen Brown”) as it is vague in its current
form, which resulted in irrelevant evidence.
Sports Being out at second is part of
baseball.
Yes The claim is correct, but requires common knowledge - that
“out at second” means “second base”. The retrieved evidence
did not support this claim explicitly.
StrategyQA A king size bed is 76 inches wide
and 80 inches long.
Yes The step is factually correct and a google search was able
to retrieve relevant evidence. The retrieved evidence was
irrelevant.
StrategyQA Pacifists do not support violence,
including stoning.
Yes The step is factually correct, and can be verified with common
sense. The retrieved evidence did not support this claim.
StrategyQA An existential crisis is a mental
health issue.
Yes The step is factually correct, and can be verified with common
sense. The retrieved evidence did not support this claim explicitly.StrategyQA
Lil Jon’s top ranked Billboard song
was "Get Low".
No The claim is wrong since the song is not the only top-ranked
song on Billboard from the artist. The retrieved evidence was
relevant and partially supported the claim (saying that the song
was indeed top-ranked in the chart).

StrategyQA Cricketers do not kick field goals. Yes The claim is correct since a field goal is a term from other
sports and kicking is generally prohibited in Cricket. The
retrieved evidence was irrelevant since this requires more
common-knowledge and inference.

Table 10: Analysis for steps where no supporting evidence was found.

20