Measuring Chain of Thought Faithfulness by Unlearning Reasoning Steps

Martin Tutek1 Fateme Hashemi Chaleshtori2 Ana Marasovic´
2 Yonatan Belinkov1
1Technion - Israel Institute of Technology 2University of Utah
martin.tutek@gmail.com {fateme.hashemi, ana.marasovic}@utah.edu belinkov@technion.ac.il

Abstract

After a torrential downpour over a week, a man
notices that the pond in his backyard is:

When prompted to think step-by-step, language
models (LMs) produce a chain of thought
(CoT), a sequence of reasoning steps that the
model supposedly used to produce its prediction.
Despite much work on CoT prompting
it is unclear if reasoning verbalized in a CoT
is faithful to the models’ parameteric beliefs.
We introduce a framework for measuring parametric
faithfulness of generated reasoning, and
propose Faithfulness by Unlearning Reasoning
steps (FUR), an instance of this framework.
FUR erases information contained in reasoning
steps from model parameters, and measures
faithfulness as the resulting effect of the
model’s prediction. Our experiments with four
LMs and five multi-hop multi-choice question
answering (MCQA) datasets show that FUR is
frequently able to precisely change the underlying
models’ prediction for a given instance by
unlearning key steps, indicating when a CoT is
parametrically faithful. Further analysis shows
that CoTs generated by models post-unlearning
support different answers, hinting at a deeper
effect of unlearning.1

arXiv:2502.14829v4 [cs.CL] 13 Dec 2025

A: melted B: dehydrated C: bloated D: salted

unlearn

CoT

 The man notices that the pond in
his backyard is bloated.

no-CoT

no-CoT

 This means that the pond has
swollen or expanded.

( … so the answer is C)

:The
answer is C
p = 1.0

:The
answer is A
p = 0.55

The CoT is faithful
Δp = 0.45

Figure 1: An illustration of PFF and FUR. In order to
produce a parameter intervention, we first prompt the
model to produce an answer and reasoning chain (CoT).
We then segment the reasoning chain and unlearn content
tokens from a single reasoning step from the model.
The unlearned model is then prompted to produce an
answer. We measure faithfulness as the adverse effect
of unlearning onto the models’ initial prediction.

1 Introduction

serving whether the contextual corruptions affect
model prediction (Lanham et al., 2023; Bentham
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024b; Madsen et al.,
2024). This setup is inherently imprecise, as erasing
steps from context does not remove knowledge
from parameters, and the model may still be able to
reconstruct corrupted information when generating
a prediction. Such approaches of context perturbation
actually measure self-consistency or contextual
faithfulness rather than parametric faithfulness, for
which one would need to erase knowledge from
parameters (Parcalabescu and Frank, 2024).

Language models (LMs) can perform various tasks
accurately and verbalize some reasoning via a socalled
chain of thought (CoT) (Kojima et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2022), even without specialized supervised
training. CoT reasoning is emerging as a powerful
technique for improving the performance of
LMs in complex tasks (OpenAI, 2024; DeepSeekAI
et al., 2025). It is not clear, however, whether
the reasoning encoded in the CoT is a faithful representation
of the internal reasoning process of the
model, casting doubts about the reliability of CoT
as a window onto the model’s ‘thought process’.

Various works set out to explore CoT faithfulness
by perturbing tokens within the CoT and ob1Code
available at https://github.com/
technion-cs-nlp/parametric-faithfulness.

We begin by introducing the Parametric Faithfulness
Framework (PFF), a novel approach to measuring
faithfulness of verbalized reasoning. We
define necessary components of instances of such
a framework in two stages: (1) an intervention on
the model parameters, which aims to erase information
in the CoT from model parameters; and (2)
evaluating parametric faithfulness, i.e. whether the
intervention affected the models’ prediction. See
components in Figure 1. PFF is a general framework
that can be instantiated with various interventions
and applied to different types of CoT and
other free-text explanations.

4. We perform detailed analyses, including human
and LLM-as-a-judge annotations, evaluating
whether unlearning fundamentally
changes the verbalized reasoning, and if steps
identified as faithful are also plausible.

2 Background and Related Work
When CoT prompted, models exhibit better performance
on complex multi-hop and arithmetic reasoning
tasks (Zhou et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023b;
Sprague et al., 2025) compared to being prompted
directly (no-CoT). Chains of thought can be used as
additional context where models can store results
of intermediate hops, but they also provide additional
compute irrespective of content (Pfau et al.,
2024; Biran et al., 2024). Verbalized reasoning
steps are frequently hypothesized to be an accurate
depiction of the models’ internal reasoning process
(Kojima et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2023a; Sun et al.,
2023). However, faithfulness of CoTs should not
be assumed despite how plausible they might seem
(Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020; Bao et al., 2025).

In this work, we propose an instance of PFF
we call Faithfulness by Unlearning Reasoning
steps (FUR), a machine unlearning-based (Cao
and Yang, 2015) approach to assessing CoT faithfulness.
We use NPO (Zhang et al., 2024b), a
preference-optimization-based unlearning method
for PFF stage 1, the intervention on the model. We
propose two metrics of quantifying faithfulness of
reasoning steps: FF-HARD quantifies whether the
CoT as a whole is faithful, while FF-SOFT identifies
the most salient reasoning steps within the CoT.
Concretely, we (a) generate a CoT, (b) segment it
into steps, (c) independently unlearn knowledge
encoded within each step from model parameters
and (d) measure the effect of erased knowledge
on the models’ prediction (Figure 1). If the target
step was successfully and precisely unlearned, and
the models’ prediction changed, the step faithfully
explains the models’ underlying reasoning process.
Through experimental evaluation on four LMs

Issues with CoTs. Natural language explanations
such as CoTs exhibit a number of issues. They
are frequently unreliable, yielding inconsistent answers
after supposedly inconsequential perturbations
(Camburu et al., 2020; Lanham et al., 2023;
Madsen et al., 2024; Sedova et al., 2024). CoTs
have been shown to not align with generated answers
(Bao et al., 2025), they are often not useful
to humans (Joshi et al., 2023) and can contain factually
incorrect or hallucinated information (Kim
et al., 2021, 2023; Zheng et al., 2023b; Peng et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2024a). Most importantly, CoTs
can obfuscate the true reasoning process of the LM
(Turpin et al., 2023; Roger and Greenblatt, 2023).
Contextual vs. Parameteric Influence. Prior
work has recognized the discord between contextual
and parametric influence on the outputs of LMs
(Neeman et al., 2023; Bao et al., 2025). Prompting

and five MCQA multi-hop reasoning datasets, we
show we are able to perform valid interventions
that affect model predictions while retaining models’
general capabilities. In subsequent analyses
we show unlearning has a profound effect on the

model, modifying the answer supported by verbalized
reasoning post-unlearning. We also compare
parametric faithfulness to plausibility via a human
study, finding that humans do not consider steps
identified as important by FUR plausible. This finding
highlights a need for specialized alignment to
obtain CoTs that are both plausible and faithful.

models with hypothetical or factually incorrect information
causes them to change their otherwise
consistently correct predictions (Kim et al., 2021,
2023; Simhi et al., 2024; Minder et al., 2025), highlighting
their high sensitivity to context tokens and
confounding any conclusions drawn from contextual
perturbations applied to reasoning steps. The
main issue with work investigating self-consistency
is the possibility of the LM reconstructing information
obfuscated by the contextual perturbation—
despite the verbalized knowledge missing, this rea-

The contributions of this work are as follows:

1. We introduce PFF, a framework for measuring
parametric faithfulness of LM reasoning.

2. We instantiate PFF with FUR using NPO, a
model unlearning method, and demonstrate
its effectiveness on unlearning fine-grained
reasoning steps.

3. We introduce FF-HARD and FF-SOFT, metrics
evaluating reasoning faithfulness, which can
be applied to full chains or individual steps.
soning could still be retrieved from the latent space
(Yang et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2024). To account
such confounders, we only use information from
generated CoTs to guide unlearning, while we generate
predictions directly without CoTs, thus disentangling
contextual influence from the prediction.

metric faithfulness. This framework supports multiple
ways to measure parametric faithfulness, and
in §4, we propose one such way.

Motivation. A line of work has analyzed the sensitivity
of models to perturbations applied to reasoning
steps (Lanham et al., 2023; Bentham et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2024b; Madsen et al., 2024, inter
alia) under the guise of faithfulness. While
perturbations applied to generated reasoning remove
information from context, the model could
still retrieve such information from its parameters
(Neeman et al., 2023). Perturbing the reasoning
chain while maintaining model parameters fixed
measures self-consistency (Parcalabescu and Frank,
2024). Self-consistency can be viewed as faithfulness
of the model output with respect to the reasoning
chain (contextual faithfulness), but it does
not reflect faithfulness of the reasoning chain with
respect to model parameters, which we call parametric
faithfulness. Between the two, parametric
faithfulness provides stronger guarantees. Models
could recover information erased only from
context, and introduced mistakes might make the
model prioritize erroneous context. While these
confounders need not always dictate the models’
output, in contextual faithfulness they can never be
explained away without quantifying the effect of
parameters. In other words, to measure parametric
faithfulness, we have to intervene on parameters.

Measuring Faithfulness. Various tests and metrics
for quantifying faithfulness of free-text explanations
in LMs have previously been proposed
(Lanham et al., 2023; Bentham et al.,
2024; Atanasova et al., 2023; Siegel et al., 2024).
By measuring properties such as sufficiency
through simulatability or counterfactual interventions
(Atanasova et al., 2023; Lanham et al., 2023),
these studies quantify susceptibility of the models’
predictions to changes in context or input. Such approaches
are valid only if there is no direct causal
link between the input and prediction that bypasses
the explanation, which is rare in LMs (Bao et al.,
2025). In our work, we analyze whether parametric
perturbations that affect the generated CoT also
affect the prediction. The closest to ours are the
contemporaneous works of Yeo et al. (2024) who
use activation patching to measure causal effect of
corrupting certain hidden states, and Zaman and
Srivastava (2025) who use knowledge editing to
evaluate existing (un)faithfulness metrics.

Background on Machine Unlearning. Machine
unlearning aims to remove some and only some
undesired knowledge or behavior so as not to be
regurgitated by LMs (Cao and Yang, 2015; Harding
et al., 2019; Ippolito et al., 2023). There are multiple
approaches to unlearning for LMs, overviewed
in Geng et al. (2025) and Appendix A. They typically
reduce the capability of the underlying LM
on target data, while retaining performance on retain
data and general capabilities. In this paper,
we unlearn reasoning steps by finetuning using the
negative preference optimization (NPO) loss on
the forget data (Zhang et al., 2024b) that discourages
the preference for forget sequences. We add
it to the KL divergence between the original and
“unlearned” model’s predictions on the retain set
(Chen and Yang, 2023; Yao et al., 2024). We chose
NPO+KL as it can be applied to unstructured text
and outperforms alternatives. More details in §4.1.

Framework. The proposed framework involves
two multi-step stages: (1) performing a valid
reasoning-based intervention on the model’s parameters,
and (2) evaluating parametric faithfulness.
We outline our framework in Figure 2.

The first stage begins by instructing the model
M to generate reasoning, which we will evaluate
for faithfulness. The reasoning is broken into
reasoning steps of a chosen granularity. Each individual
reasoning step is used to guide an intervention
on M’s parameters, targeting those where a
step’s information is stored. This produces a modified
model, M∗
. Moving to the next stage makes

sense only if the intervention is successful. Thus,
our framework requires defining and implementing
controls that verify that the change in behavior
between M∗
and M stems from the intended intervention
rather than extraneous factors.

3 PFF: A Framework for Measuring
Parametric Faithfulness

In the second stage, faithfulness is assessed with
at least one of two evaluation protocols: (1) Instruct
both M∗
and M to directly give answers,
then compute how often and how strongly their

We introduce a framework for measuring the faithfulness
of generated reasoning, which we call para
Stage 1: Intervention Stage 2: Evaluation

Unlearning (§4.1)

Controls (§4.2)

∆prediction (§6.2)

∆reasoning (§6.3)

NPO+KL (Eq. 9)
on individual
CoT steps

1. Efficacy (Eq. 2)

Prediction difference
between M and M∗
.
ffhard and ffsoft (§4.3)

CoT Difference
between M and M∗

2. Specificity (Eq. 3)

3. General capabilities

Figure 2: A high level overview of the two stages of PFF: (1) parameter intervention and (2) evaluation. We
instantiate PFF with FUR by using NPO+KL, controls to assure precision of unlearning and faithfulness metrics.

answers differ; (2) Instruct M∗
and M to reasonthen-answer,
then compute how often they present
different reasoning. In both cases, the more faithful
the reasoning is to internal computations, the
greater the difference in answers and reasoning
between M∗
and M should be.

Section A for readers unfamiliar with NPO+KL.

NPO+KL requires defining the forget set, DFG,
and the retain set, DRT, which we construct as follows.
First, we set reasoning steps to be sentences
with at least two content words. For each step, we
construct its DFG of input-output pairs formed by
taking, for each content word in the step, the prefix
up to that word as input and the tokens of the
content word as output.3 NPO updates the model’s
parameters to discourage it from predicting content
words DFG given prior context. We similarly
construct DRT for a given step as content words
from four randomly selected CoT steps from other
instances. Concretely, we sample 4 other instances
from the same dataset and randomly select a CoT
step with at least two content words from each
instance. We then minimize the KL divergence
between the outputs of the original model and the
model post-unlearning, using content tokens from
these steps as the targets. The KL divergence preserves
the model’s original completions for these
non-target contexts.

The first protocol uses direct answers rather than
those obtained via CoT prompting because the reasoning
steps are expected to change after the intervention.
This shift in context makes it unclear
whether changes in the answers come from the intended
effect of the intervention or from the new
reasoning context post-intervention. When comparing
direct answers, we hypothesize that if the
model generates the same answer using direct and
CoT prompting, then the internal reasoning of the
model is also the same.

4 FUR: Unlearning Reasoning Steps
We instantiate the parametric faithfulness framework
(§3) by specifying its three elements: unlearning
reasoning steps as the parameter intervention
method (§4.1), controls to assess unlearning validity
(§4.2), and faithfulness measurements (§4.3).
4.1 Parameter Intervention

We unlearn each reasoning step individually, for
a total of 5 iterations, and refer to the model obtained
after unlearning the i-th reasoning step alone
as M(i)
∗
. One unlearning iteration refers to a pass

The idea behind unlearning reasoning steps as the
intervention is that once the information contained
in generated reasoning is successfully erased from
the model M’s parameters, its modified version
M∗
should not produce the same predictions or
reasoning that M did if that reasoning is indeed
associated with M’s internal computations.

over DFG. We only update the second FF2 matrix
of the Transformer MLPs, as this layer was found
to act as a memory store (Geva et al., 2021b; Meng
et al., 2022) and model editing methods frequently
target it to update information (Meng et al., 2022,
2023; Hong et al., 2024). We only vary the learning
rate while keeping the remainder of methodspecific
hyperparameters fixed to values found by
original works. We report them in Section E.

We erase knowledge contained in the verbalized
reasoning steps using a preference-optimization
unlearning method, NPO (Zhang et al., 2024b).
Specifically, the KL-regularized variant of it, which
also minimizes the divergence between the base
and unlearned model outputs on a retain set to preserve
fluency.2 We provide a detailed overview in

always slightly worse than NPO+KL. We explored ROME
and MEMIT (Meng et al., 2022, 2023), but they require a
structured format, and do not perform well under paraphrases.

3Unlearning tokens beyond content words was detrimental
to the model’s fluency in our early exploration.

2We experimented with NPO+grad-diff, but results were
4.2 Controls

ri
. Unless stated otherwise, we report averages of
specificity across unlearning iterations, reasoning
steps, and instances.

Unlearning is deemed successful if the target information
is removed (high efficacy), but the model
retains its general capabilities, fluency, and performance
on non-forgotten in-domain data (high
specificity) (Gandikota et al., 2024). We adapt these
criteria for unlearning methods within FUR.
Efficacy. We measure efficacy of unlearning as
the reduction in the length-normalized sequence
probability of the unlearned CoT step. Concretely,
for a reasoning step ri
, consisting of T tokens

General Capabilities. In order to measure
whether unlearning affects general model capabilities,
we compare the performance on MMLU
(Hendrycks et al., 2021) before and after unlearning.
Due to prohibitive costs of evaluating fewshot
MMLU for each instance and unlearned CoT
step, we (1) opt for zero-shot evaluation as the
instruction-tuned models report good performance
in this setup, and (2) MMLU score of the model after
unlearning each step from 10 randomly selected
CoTs (≈ 50 unlearning steps).

ri,j , j ∈ {1, . . . , T}, the length-normalized probability
of that reasoning step with prefix pfi
under
model M is:

Remark. Note that we do not aim for efficacy
to reach 1, as that would imply that the unlearned
step has probability 0 (Eq. 2), which in turn would
likely adversely affect the fluency of the model.
Rather, we want the original CoT step to become
a less likely reasoning pathway, but still a possible
sequence of tokens. The core tension between efficacy,
specificity, and general capabilities is delicate,
and presents one major hurdle in model unlearning.
4.3 Faithfulness Measurements

pM(ri) = 1
T
Y
T
j=0

pM(ri,j |pfi

, ri,<j ), (1)

where pfi
consists of the query q for the given
instance (comprising the question and answer
choices) and the previous reasoning steps ri
∗<i.
Then, efficacy E is the normalized difference in
reasoning step probabilities of the initial model M
and the model post-unlearning the i-th step, M(i)
∗
:

pM(ri) − pM(i)∗ (ri)
pM(ri)

We deploy the faithfulness evaluation protocol described
in §3, where we prompt M∗
and M to

E
(i) =

. (2)

answer directly, without reasoning, and then compute
how often their answers differ. If M’s verbalized
reasoning is generally faithful to its internal
computations, the answer will change frequently.
We propose hard and soft versions of estimating
faithfulness (ff) of full reasoning chains and
segmented steps, respectively. The hard version
(FF-HARD) provides a binary answer to whether an
explanation is faithful or not, by measuring whether
unlearning any step causes the model to output a
different label as the most likely one:

Note that when computing pM(i)∗ , we use the original
prefix pfi
generated by M. Throughout our

experiments, we report average efficacy across unlearned
steps and instances.

Specificity. We measure specificity of unlearning
on unrelated, but in-domain data to account for
the adverse effect of model unlearning. To this
end, we randomly select n = 20 instances from
the same dataset as a held-out set Ds, and measure
specificity as the proportion of unchanged labels
on this held-out set after unlearning.4 Therefore,
for predicted labels yk under the initial model M
and y
∗
k
produced by the unlearned model M∗
:

(i)
∗

ffhard = 1[∃ ri such that y ̸= y

], (4)

is the i-th reasoning step and y
(i)
∗
the
prediction made by M(i)
∗
(after the i-th reasoning
step is unlearned).5 The use-case for FF-HARD
is answering the question: Is the reasoning chain
produced by the LM faithful?

where ri

1
|Ds|
X
|Ds|
k=1

1[yk = y

∗
k

S =

]. (3)

We compute the specificity score after each iteration
of unlearning for the target reasoning step
4We choose Ds once and use it to evaluate every unlearned
model M∗
. Note that this approach might be overly strict as
some instances from Ds sometimes require information from
the target step, which we unlearn. This effect is noticeable in
Sports (§6.2). We leave this consideration for future work.

The soft version (FF-SOFT) assigns a value f ∈
[0, 1] to a reasoning step, indicating how much
5A single faithful step is sufficient to show that the gist of
the model’s internal reasoning is captured by the verbalized
reasoning. In this sense, the entire chain can be considered
faithful.
probability mass has unlearning that step shifted
from the initial answer.

select a subset of 250 instances from the test split
of each dataset to balance the question sources.6
Details of datasets and models are in Section C.

ff(i)
soft = p(y|M) − p(y|M(i)

∗

). (5)

Generating CoTs. We use a two-step prompting
approach (Bowman et al., 2022; Lanham et al.,
2023), where the model is first prompted to generate
the CoT based on the question and answer
options, and subsequently prompted to complete
the answer letter based on the question, answer
choices, and the CoT. We use greedy decoding
when generating, producing a single CoT for each
instance. For the prompts used, see Section D.

The use-case for FF-SOFT is answering: Which are
the most salient steps of the reasoning chain?

Perfectly determining whether a reasoning chain
constitutes a faithful explanation is difficult. Due
to the existence of alternative explanations (Wang
et al., 2023), it is possible that a faithful explanation,
even when unlearned from model parameters,
will not tangibly affect the models’ prediction.
Therefore, we do not expect FF-HARD to
have perfect recall. However, when an unlearned
step notably changes the model’s prediction, without
adversely affecting the general capabilities of
the model, we can confidently claim that step to
be faithful. For the remaining 100−FF-HARD instances,
there are three possibilities: (1) FUR failed
to uncover and unlearn the true reasoning path, (2)
the model used multiple valid reasoning paths, and
unlearning one did not significantly affect its prediction,
or (3) the model was genuinely unfaithful
in its explanation. In this sense, FF-HARD represents
a lower bound on the model’s true faithfulness
— it is the rate at which we can successfully
uncover faithful reasoning (assuming that the flip
happened due to a valid intervention).
5 Experimental Setup

Preprocessing CoTs. To obtain fine-grained information
on faithfulness of individual steps, we
segment each CoT into sentences using NLTK
(Bird, 2006). When unlearning, we target only
tokens that are constituents of content words.7 We
opt for this approach so as to not unlearn the capability
to verbalize reasoning from the models,
but only knowledge within the steps, which we frequently
observed prior to making this modification.
6 Results

We first report results of control measurements validating
our intervention (§6.1). Subsequently, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of FUR in detecting
faithful reasoning (§6.2). We then investigate the
effect of unlearning on generated CoTs (§6.3). Finally,
we use FUR to identify key reasoning steps
and assess their plausibility in a user study (§6.4).
6.1 Effectiveness of Unlearning

We conduct all of our experiments zero-shot on
multi-choice question answering (MCQA) datasets.
Models. We use four representative instructiontuned
models from three families: LLaMA-3-8BInstruct
and Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct (Touvron et al.,
2023), Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023),
and Phi-3-mini-4k-Instruct (Abdin et al., 2024).

We report the results of unlearning when using the
best hyperparameters for each method and dataset
in Table 1. We measure each model’s efficacy,
specificity, and MMLU performance before and
after unlearning. The specificity and general capabilities
of these models are largely unchanged
while reporting good efficacy, indicating that the
information from the target CoT step has been unlearned
without affecting the model adversely. We
report the results of various learning rates and discuss
methodological choices in Section E.

Datasets. We employ five diverse multi-hop
datasets: OpenbookQA (Book; Mihaylov et al.,
2018), ARC-Challenge (Arc-ch; Clark et al., 2018),
StrategyQA (SQA; Geva et al., 2021a), TruthfulQA
(TQA; Lin et al., 2022) and the Sports understanding
subtask of BigBench-Hard (Srivastava et al.,
2023). These datasets span a variety of domains,
necessitating knowledge of science, sports, geography,
health, law, finance and logic. We choose
MCQA as the target task as it simplifies analysis
of how the models’ predictive distribution shifts
after unlearning due to availability of alternative
answers. To retain comparable sizes, and due to
expensive runtime of unlearning each CoT step, we

6.2 Does Unlearning Change Predictions?

In the previous section, we show that we can precisely
unlearn information encoded in a reason6For
SQA, we use instances from the validation split due

to the availability of labels. Sports has a total of 248 instances.

7Concretely, we select noun, proper noun, verb, adjective,
and number tokens, after running part-of-speech tagging with
SpaCy en_core_web_sm (https://spacy.io/).
Base ARC-Challenge OpenbookQA Sports StrategyQA TruthfulQA
Model Gen Eff Spec Gen Eff Spec Gen Eff Spec Gen Eff Spec Gen Eff Spec Gen
LLaMA-8B 63.9 43.2 98.3 63.8 44.1 97.7 63.8 20.8 98.1 63.8 48.3 95.7 63.8 39.6 97.0 63.8
LLaMA-3B 60.4 30.7 98.1 60.2 36.6 96.1 60.2 29.3 96.6 60.3 36.3 96.9 60.3 28.9 95.9 60.3
Mistral-2 59.0 71.5 96.4 58.9 72.1 97.6 58.8 50.6 94.8 59.0 65.4 96.3 59.0 48.6 95.0 59.0
Phi-3 69.9 40.8 99.5 69.6 44.2 99.4 69.6 31.1 97.0 69.9 18.7 98.2 69.9 11.0 97.4 69.8

Table 1: Unlearning results. Efficacy (Eff) is the percentage reduction in the probability of the unlearned CoT step
(Eq. 2). Specificity (Spec) is the agreement of M with M(i)
∗
on the held-out set (Eq. 3). General capabilities (Gen)
measures accuracy of models on MMLU post-unlearning. The second column shows the base MMLU accuracy of
each model. Scores reported are averages across 230 CoTs & all steps (Eff, Spec) or 10 CoTs & all steps (Gen).

ARC-challenge OpenbookQA Sports StrategyQA TruthfulQA
Model FUR +mistake FUR +mistake FUR +mistake FUR +mistake FUR +mistake
LLaMA-8B 39.6 16.2 44.3 18.0 29.3 30.0 30.7 32.3 68.5 25.0
LLaMA-3B 64.4 31.1 68.6 45.9 64.9 65.5 71.0 48.3 85.7 32.9
Mistral-2 40.0 31.6 60.0 35.7 45.3 36.8 48.2 30.2 44.4 30.3
Phi-3 39.1 27.6 46.2 38.5 54.0 52.2 22.2 49.7 29.1 31.9

Table 2: % of instances where adding mistakes or unlearning a reasoning step changes the model’s answer.
Measured only on instances where no-CoT and CoT model predictions agree. Scores over 1% higher in bold.

ing step. We now focus on how frequently unlearning
information from reasoning steps causes
the model predictions to change through FF-HARD
(Eq. 4), and contrast our method to Add-mistake,
a contextual faithfulness method (Lanham et al.,
2023). Add-mistake prompts another LM (in our
case, gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18) to introduce a
mistake to a single step of a CoT generated by the
target model. The target model is then prompted
with a perturbed CoT containing the mistake. If the
prediction of the model changes, the CoT is considered
faithful. We report the results of instance-level
faithfulness for FUR and Add-mistake in Table 2.
8

Model Arc-ch Book Sports SQA TQA
LLaMA-8B 81.5 80.2 73.1 66.7 86.9
LLaMA-3B 85.4 69.3 81.0 94.2 84.9
Mistral-2 83.9 90.5 80.3 86.5 81.7
Phi-3 75.7 75.5 69.2 73.6 81.1

Table 3: LLM-as-a-judge results assessing if CoTs support
different answers after unlearning. Numbers are
percentages of how frequently GPT-4o states that the
CoT supports a different answer post-unlearning.

to sometimes decrease even if the intervention is
precise, and a more precise specificity criterion
would likely yield better parametric faithfulness.

We compare to this popular baseline, as groundtruth
faithfulness is not available and cannot be
directly labeled since the model’s internal process
is unknown. Thus, we analyze whether FUR reveals
different trends compared to an existing metric.

We find that unlearning efficacy is highly indicative
of faithfulness. The Pearson correlation
between average efficacy and FF-HARD is high:
0.889 with p < 0.0001. We interpret this as indication
that reasoning chains generated by the
models are generally faithful, as the stronger we
unlearn, the more frequent the change in prediction.
The limiting factor is that stronger unlearning damages
model integrity. Nevertheless, development
of more precise unlearning techniques will remove
this limitation. We discuss this further, along with
step-level faithfulness Section I.

Both methods report reasonably high percentages
of changing predictions across all models
and datasets, but in general parametric faithfulness
through FUR identifies a larger proportion of faithful
CoTs than contextual faithfulness. This result
suggests that contextual faithfulness may underestimate
CoT faithfulness. Notably, Sports, the
dataset where Add-mistake reports strong results,
has a high degree of knowledge overlap between
instances. This causes the specificity scores (Eq. 3)

6.3 Does Unlearning Change Reasoning?
Thus far, we focused on one of the two PFF faithfulness
measurement protocols, where we directly
prompt models pre- and post-unlearning. In this

8We explore and comment other baselines in Section B.
After a torrential downpour over a week, a man notices that the pond in his backyard is
(A): melted (B): dehydrated (C): bloated (D): salted

Base model

Iter 1

Iter 2

Iter 3

Iter 4

Iter 5

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

A B C D
0.0

A B C D
0.0

A B C D
0.0

A B C D
0.0

A B C D
0.0

A B C D
0.0

The man notices that the pond in his backyard is bloated after a torrential downpour over a week.
This means that the pond has swollen or expanded due to the excessive water from the rain. Base
Target
1. The pond is filled with water, and it's been raining heavily for a week.
2. Rainwater is freshwater, so it's not going to add salt to the pond.
3. The pond is not a living being, so it can't be "dehydrated" or "bloat".
4. Given the heavy rainfall, it's unlikely that the pond would "melt" (unless it's made of ice). Iter 1

Figure 3: A sample result of unlearning applied to a CoT step generated by LLaMA-3-8B on an instance from
OpenbookQA. The bar charts represent no-CoT probability assigned to each answer option in that unlearning
iteration. Model CoTs pre- and post-unlearning are displayed below. We omit CoTs from other unlearning iterations
for space as they change very little after the 2nd iteration. One step is slightly shortened for presentation purposes.

section we analyze the other protocol by examining
whether reasoning within CoTs also changes
post-unlearning. To illustrate this, Figure 3 visualizes
how prediction probabilities of the no-CoTprompted
model change through unlearning iterations,
along with the CoTs of the unlearned model.
‘Base’ refers to the model pre-unlearning. We see
that even after a single unlearning iteration, all of
the probability mass is reassigned from the initial
prediction onto two alternatives. The CoT follows
the prediction of the no-CoT model, now arguing
against the initial prediction post-unlearning.

Can the Swiss Guard fill the Virginia General Assembly chairs?
A): Yes
B): No

p=0.17

The Swiss Guard is a military corps that serves as the
personal bodyguards of the Pope.

p=-0.13

They are known for their distinctive uniforms and ceremonial
duties.

p=0.12

The Virginia General Assembly is the legislative body of the
state of Virginia, composed of the House of Delegates and
the Senate.

p=0.20

The Swiss Guard is not a legislative body, and they do not
have the authority to fill chairs in the Virginia General
Assembly.

Figure 4: Heatmap produced by unlearning reasoning
steps. ∆p denotes FF-SOFT: the change in initial answer
probability. Positive change means probability was
removed from the initial prediction, negative indicates
it was added.

To quantitatively assess how frequently the
verbalized reasoning of the model changes postunlearning,
we employ an LLM-as-a-judge (Zheng
et al., 2023a) to verify if unlearning caused the
generated CoT to support a different answer, indicating
deeper unlearning, or if the change in model
prediction is not reflected in reasoning (Cohen
et al., 2024). We first select instances where CoT
and no-CoT models agree in their changed predictions.
From these cases, we select reasoning steps
from the last iteration of unlearning. We prompt
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 to judge whether the
CoTs generated by the model before and after unlearning
support different answers. We report results
in Table 3 and detail our setup in Section H.

a given instance contribute the most toward the
prediction. For one example in Figure 4 we plot
heatmaps for each reasoning step, which indicate
how much probability mass has been shifted to
(red) or from (green) the models’ initial answer
when that step was unlearned. We can see in the
example that steps that verbalize background information
(1, 3) and directly state the models’ prediction
(4) decrease the probability that the model
assigns to its initial prediction, while unlearning the
background step (2) actually increases probability
of the initial answer.

Overall, post-unlearning CoTs largely support
different answers compared to the base LM, indicating
the unlearning-based intervention fundamentally
changes the models’ verbalized reasoning.
6.4 Quantifying Step Level Faithfulness

To quantitatively assess whether FF-SOFT identifies
plausible steps as relevant, we conduct a user
study on a random sample of 100 instances. We
show each participant a question, answer choices,
and CoT steps, highlighting the answer predicted
by the model and the target CoT step. We prompt
the participants to annotate whether the step in

In this section, we showcase how FF-SOFT (Eq. 5)
can be used to identify which reasoning steps in
ever, not all CoT steps are equally salient for the
prediction. We envision that models similar to verifiers
(Lightman et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024a;
Jacovi et al., 2024) can detect, and rank, CoT steps
most important for the models’ reasoning (thought
anchors; Bogdan et al., 2025), which can then be
prioritized for erasure. Recent work supporting
our vision delves into analyzing the importance
of, as well as controlling LMs chains-of-thought
(Lee et al., 2025; Xiao et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025).
An interesting avenue for further work is to train

100

80

FF-hard

60

40

20

SQA
LLaMA-8B
SQA
LLaMA-3B
0

Sports
LLaMA-8B

Sports
LLaMA-3B

models ranking CoT step importance on the signal
produced by unlearning success, which has the
potential to yield further insights into LM internals.

LoRA r=8

LoRA r=128
Full

LoRA r=32

Figure 5: FF-HARD scores of models from the LLaMA
family on the Sports understanding and StrategyQA
datasets. LoRA-tuned models are able to match, and
even surpass scores obtained by full fine-tuning.

Reducing space complexity. To address the issue
of space, we explore using LoRA (Hu et al.,
2022) to reduce the number of active parameters.
We apply LoRA tuning with ranks 8, 32 and 128 to
the FF2 matrix of two LLaMA models (3B and 8B)
and 30 instances from Sports and StrategyQA. As
seen in Figure 5, LoRA offers a potential alternative
to full fine-tuning. Interestingly, applying FUR
to LLaMA-3B changes predictions on the exact
same set of instances across all variants, indicating
that targeted knowledge might reside in a low rank
within that model. We detail the experimental setup
and provide additional results in Section F.

question supports the predicted answer in context
of the given CoT on a 1–5 Likert scale (Likert,
1932). We provide more details of the user study,
data selection and the protocol in Section J.

We find a weak Pearson correlation of 0.15 between
FF-SOFT and human ratings of supportiveness.
This result provides further evidence that
faithfulness, in general, does not correlate with
plausibility (Agarwal et al., 2024). In order to improve
correspondence between these two notions,
one might need to specifically align LMs for reasoning
plausibility (Ouyang et al., 2022).
7 Discussion and Future Outlook

8 Conclusion

We introduced a novel parametric faithfulness

framework (PFF) for precisely measuring faithfulness
of chains of thought. We instantiated the
framework by proposing faithfulness through unlearning
reasoning steps (FUR) and introduced two
metrics for quantifying faithfulness of CoTs. The
hard metric FF-HARD answers the question “Is the
CoT generated by the model faithful?”, while the
soft metric FF-SOFT answers the question “Which
CoT steps are most relevant for the models’ prediction?”.
We then conducted detailed qualitative
and quantitative analyses confirming the validity
of our proposed approach, and demonstrating its
benefits compared to perturbation-based contextual
faithfulness approaches. We showed that unlearning
certain steps causes the model to verbalize a
reasoning pathway arguing for a different answer,
confirming that the unlearned steps were internally
used to generate the prediction. We also found that
CoT steps identified as highly relevant are not considered
plausible by humans, higlighting the need
for specialized alignment.

Recent works have turned to exploring test-time
scaling via reasoning language models such as
OpenAI o1 (Jaech et al., 2024) and DeepSeek
R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025). Such models are
trained to generate comprehensive reasoning chains
spanning thousands of tokens, which incurs an additional
layer of complexity for applying FUR due to
a large number of constituent steps. While a body
of work strives to reduce overthinking in CoTs (Jin
et al., 2024; Hassid et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025;
Amiri et al., 2025), the problem of length still persists
in cases where long CoTs are necessary. The
issue here is twofold: (1) fully fine-tuning all second
feed-forward layers of the model involves updating
a large number of parameters, and (2) intervening
on each CoT step can be time-consuming.

Reducing time complexity. FUR can innately be
applied to individual CoT steps in parallel. How
Limitations

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Israel Science
Foundation (grant 448/20), an Azrieli Foundation
Early Career Faculty Fellowship, and an AI Alignment
grant from Open Philanthropy. This research
was funded by the European Union (ERC, ControlLM,
101165402). Views and opinions expressed
are however those of the author(s) only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union or
the European Research Council Executive Agency.
Neither the European Union nor the granting authority
can be held responsible for them.

The implementation of our proposed framework
has a number of limitations, both in design as well
as implementation. By eliminating the contextual
confounder, we limit ourselves to studying cases
in which the CoT and no-CoT predictions of the
models agree — as these are the only cases where
one can hypothesize both instances of the model
use the same reasoning. This limitation can be bypassed
in future work by measuring sensitivity of
the CoT prompted model post-unlearning to surface
level changes in the CoT, denoting consistency
under semantically equivalent context rather than
sensitivity to surface level cues.

References

Secondly, our approach relies on machine unlearning
techniques, which are imperfect. It is possible
that either localization of information within
parameters or their erasure are imprecise or inefficient
for some target reasoning steps. We rely
on the rapid development of the field of machine
unlearning and model editing to produce better and
more precise methods such as CRISP (Ashuach
et al., 2025a) and PISCES (Gur-Arieh et al., 2025),
which can seamlessly be integrated into our framework.
While our method identifies faithful explanations
with high precision, its recall cannot be
guaranteed due to either unsuccessful unlearning,
unfaithful explanation or the existence of alternative
explanations. Furthermore, applying machine
unlearning requires the capability to fine-tune the
target model, which makes FUR not applicable to
closed API-based models. Despite this limitation,
we strongly believe that credible faithfulness of natural
language explanations such as CoTs requires
parameter access and interventions.

Marah I Abdin, Sam Ade Jacobs, Ammar Ahmad Awan,
Jyoti Aneja, Ahmed Awadallah, Hany Awadalla,
Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Harkirat
S. Behl, Alon Benhaim, Misha Bilenko, Johan
Bjorck, Sébastien Bubeck, Martin Cai, Caio
César Teodoro Mendes, Weizhu Chen, Vishrav
Chaudhary, Parul Chopra, Allie Del Giorno, Gustavo
de Rosa, Matthew Dixon, Ronen Eldan, Dan Iter,
Amit Garg, Abhishek Goswami, Suriya Gunasekar,
Emman Haider, Junheng Hao, Russell J. Hewett,
Jamie Huynh, Mojan Javaheripi, Xin Jin, Piero Kauffmann,
Nikos Karampatziakis, Dongwoo Kim, Mahoud
Khademi, Lev Kurilenko, James R. Lee, Yin Tat
Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Chen Liang, Weishung Liu, Eric
Lin, Zeqi Lin, Piyush Madan, Arindam Mitra, Hardik
Modi, Anh Nguyen, Brandon Norick, Barun Patra,
Daniel Perez-Becker, Thomas Portet, Reid Pryzant,
Heyang Qin, Marko Radmilac, Corby Rosset, Sambudha
Roy, Olatunji Ruwase, Olli Saarikivi, Amin
Saied, Adil Salim, Michael Santacroce, Shital Shah,
Ning Shang, Hiteshi Sharma, Xia Song, Masahiro
Tanaka, Xin Wang, Rachel Ward, Guanhua Wang,
Philipp A. Witte, Michael Wyatt, Can Xu, Jiahang
Xu, Sonali Yadav, Fan Yang, Ziyi Yang, Donghan Yu,
Chengruidong Zhang, Cyril Zhang, Jianwen Zhang,
Li Lyna Zhang, Yi Zhang, Yue Zhang, Yunan Zhang,
and Xiren Zhou. 2024. Phi-3 technical report: A
highly capable language model locally on your phone.
CoRR, abs/2404.14219.

Lastly, our experimental setup is limited to English
language MCQA tasks. We opt for MCQA as
it simplifies the analyses we perform in the paper,
by allowing us to visualize probability distribution
shifts over answer options without producing answer
options ourselves. Both faithfulness metrics
in FUR only take into account the probability, or
whether the answer is the arg max decoding, and

Chirag Agarwal, Sree Harsha Tanneru, and Himabindu

Lakkaraju. 2024. Faithfulness vs. plausibility: On the
(un)reliability of explanations from large language
models. CoRR, abs/2402.04614.

Alireza Amiri, Xinting Huang, Mark Rofin, and Michael
Hahn. 2025. Lower bounds for chain-of-thought
reasoning in hard-attention transformers. CoRR,
abs/2502.02393.

are thus applicable beyond the MCQA scenario.
Applying our method to other tasks such as longform
generation can be done by assessing whether
the direct answer changes after unlearning a reasoning
step. We opt for natural language tasks as
factual information is conceptually easier to unlearn
compared to, e.g., procedural information
driving arithmetic reasoning (Ruis et al., 2025).

Tomer Ashuach, Dana Arad, Aaron Mueller, Martin

Tutek, and Yonatan Belinkov. 2025a. Crisp: Persistent
concept unlearning via sparse autoencoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13650.

Tomer Ashuach, Martin Tutek, and Yonatan Belinkov.
2025b. REVS: Unlearning sensitive information in
language models via rank editing in the vocabulary
space. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 14774–14797,
Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.of
inconsistent natural language explanations. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020,
Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 4157–4165. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Pepa Atanasova, Oana-Maria Camburu, Christina Lioma,
Thomas Lukasiewicz, Jakob Grue Simonsen,
and Isabelle Augenstein. 2023. Faithfulness tests
for natural language explanations. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages
283–294. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Yinzhi Cao and Junfeng Yang. 2015. Towards making

systems forget with machine unlearning. In 2015
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP 2015,
San Jose, CA, USA, May 17-21, 2015, pages 463–480.
IEEE Computer Society.

Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Chengxi Li, and Kai Fan.
2024a. Alphamath almost zero: Process supervision
without process. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS
2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15,
2024.

Guangsheng Bao, Hongbo Zhang, Cunxiang Wang,
Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. 2025. How likely do
llms with cot mimic human reasoning? COLING,
pages 7831–7850.

Jiaao Chen and Diyi Yang. 2023. Unlearn what you

Oliver Bentham, Nathan Stringham, and Ana Marasovic.
2024. Chain-of-thought unfaithfulness as disguised
accuracy. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2024.

want to forget: Efficient unlearning for LLMs. In Proceedings
of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 12041–
12052, Singapore. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Eden Biran, Daniela Gottesman, Sohee Yang, Mor Geva,

and Amir Globerson. 2024. Hopping too late: Exploring
the limitations of large language models on
multi-hop queries. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November
12-16, 2024, pages 14113–14130. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Yanda Chen, Ruiqi Zhong, Narutatsu Ri, Chen Zhao,

He He, Jacob Steinhardt, Zhou Yu, and Kathleen R.
McKeown. 2024b. Do models explain themselves?
counterfactual simulatability of natural language explanations.
In Forty-first International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria,
July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net.

Steven Bird. 2006. NLTK: the natural language toolkit.
In ACL 2006, 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Proceedings
of the Conference, Sydney, Australia, 17-21
July 2006. The Association for Computer Linguistics.

Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot,
Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind
Tafjord. 2018. Think you have solved question answering?
try arc, the AI2 reasoning challenge. CoRR,
abs/1803.05457.

Paul C. Bogdan, Uzay Macar, Neel Nanda, and Arthur

Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson,
and Mor Geva. 2024. Evaluating the ripple effects of
knowledge editing in language models. Trans. Assoc.
Comput. Linguistics, 12:283–298.

Conmy. 2025. Thought anchors: Which LLM reasoning
steps matter? CoRR, abs/2506.19143.

Samuel R. Bowman, Jeeyoon Hyun, Ethan Perez, Edwin
Chen, Craig Pettit, Scott Heiner, Kamile Lukosiute,
Amanda Askell, Andy Jones, Anna Chen,
Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon,
Christopher Olah, Daniela Amodei, Dario
Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson,
Jackson Kernion, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeffrey
Ladish, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Liane
Lovitt, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Schiefer, Nicholas
Joseph, Noemí Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Robin
Larson, Sam McCandlish, Sandipan Kundu, Scott
Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Stanislav
Fort, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom
Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac HatfieldDodds,
Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Measuring
progress on scalable oversight for large language
models. CoRR, abs/2211.03540.

DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang,

Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang,
Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong
Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue,
Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu,
Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang,
Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji,
Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo,
Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang,
Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Honghui
Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li,
Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jingchang
Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L.
Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai Dong, Kai Hu,
Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
Wang, Lecong Zhang, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang,
Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang,
Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Meng Li, Miaojun

Oana-Maria Camburu, Brendan Shillingford, Pasquale

Minervini, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom.
2020. Make up your mind! adversarial generation
consumer privacy act of 2018. Journal of Data Protection
& Privacy, 2(3):234–253.

Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng
Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du,
Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang,
R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu,
Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shengfeng Ye,
Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting
Pan, and S. S. Li. 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing
reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement
learning. CoRR, abs/2501.12948.

Michael Hassid, Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and

Roy Schwartz. 2025. Don’t overthink it. preferring
shorter thinking chains for improved LLM reasoning.
CoRR, abs/2505.17813.

Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou,

Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
2021. Measuring massive multitask language understanding.
9th International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Yuntian Deng, Yejin Choi, and Stuart M. Shieber. 2024.
From explicit cot to implicit cot: Learning to internalize
cot step by step. CoRR, abs/2405.14838.

Yihuai Hong, Lei Yu, Shauli Ravfogel, Haiqin Yang,

Ronen Eldan and Mark Russinovich. 2023. Who’s

and Mor Geva. 2024. Intrinsic evaluation of unlearning
using parametric knowledge traces. CoRR,
abs/2406.11614.

harry potter? approximate unlearning in llms. CoRR,
abs/2310.02238.

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Litu Ou, Ashish Sabharwal, and
Tushar Khot. 2023a. Specializing smaller language
models towards multi-step reasoning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2023,
23-29 July 2023, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume
202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 10421–10430. PMLR.

Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
Weizhu Chen. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of
large language models. In The Tenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022,
Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net.

Daphne Ippolito, Florian Tramèr, Milad Nasr, Chiyuan

Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Ashish Sabharwal, Peter Clark, and
Tushar Khot. 2023b. Complexity-based prompting
for multi-step reasoning. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.Zhang,
Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Christopher
A. Choquette-Choo, and Nicholas Carlini. 2023.
Preventing generation of verbatim memorization in
language models gives a false sense of privacy. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Natural Language
Generation Conference, INLG 2023, Prague,
Czechia, September 11 - 15, 2023, pages 28–53. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Rohit Gandikota, Sheridan Feucht, Samuel Marks, and

David Bau. 2024. Erasing conceptual knowledge
from language models. CoRR, abs/2410.02760.

Alon Jacovi, Yonatan Bitton, Bernd Bohnet, Jonathan

Herzig, Or Honovich, Michael Tseng, Michael
Collins, Roee Aharoni, and Mor Geva. 2024. A
chain-of-thought is as strong as its weakest link: A
benchmark for verifiers of reasoning chains. In Proceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-
16, 2024, pages 4615–4634. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Jiahui Geng, Qing Li, Herbert Woisetschlaeger, Zongxiong
Chen, Yuxia Wang, Preslav Nakov, Hans-Arno
Jacobsen, and Fakhri Karray. 2025. A comprehensive
survey of machine unlearning techniques for large
language models. CoRR, abs/2503.01854.

Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot,
Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. 2021a. Did aristotle
use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with
implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:346–
361.

Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards faithfully
interpretable NLP systems: How should we
define and evaluate faithfulness? In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 4198–4205, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mor Geva, Roei Schuster, Jonathan Berant, and Omer
Levy. 2021b. Transformer feed-forward layers are
key-value memories. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 5484–5495, Online and
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson,
Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar,
Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney,
Alex Iftimie, Alex Karpenko, Alex Tachard Passos,
Alexander Neitz, Alexander Prokofiev, Alexander
Wei, Allison Tam, Ally Bennett, Ananya Kumar,
Andre Saraiva, Andrea Vallone, Andrew Duberstein,
Andrew Kondrich, Andrey Mishchenko,
Andy Applebaum, Angela Jiang, Ashvin Nair, Barret
Zoph, Behrooz Ghorbani, Ben Rossen, Benjamin
Sokolowsky, Boaz Barak, Bob McGrew, Borys Minaiev,
Botao Hao, Bowen Baker, Brandon Houghton,

Yoav Gur-Arieh, Clara Suslik, Yihuai Hong, Fazl Barez,
and Mor Geva. 2025. Precise in-parameter concept
erasure in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.22586.

Elizabeth Liz Harding, Jarno J Vanto, Reece Clark,

L Hannah Ji, and Sara C Ainsworth. 2019. Understanding
the scope and impact of the california
Brandon McKinzie, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi,
Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Chak Ming Li,
Charles de Bourcy, Chelsea Voss, Chen Shen, Chong
Zhang, Chris Koch, Chris Orsinger, Christopher
Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clive Chan, Dan Roberts,
Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levy, Daniel Selsam, David
Dohan, David Farhi, David Mely, David Robinson,
Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Dragos Oprica, Eben Freeman,
Eddie Zhang, Edmund Wong, Elizabeth Proehl,
Enoch Cheung, Eric Mitchell, Eric Wallace, Erik
Ritter, Evan Mays, Fan Wang, Felipe Petroski Such,
Filippo Raso, Florencia Leoni, Foivos Tsimpourlas,
Francis Song, Fred von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit,
Geoff Salmon, Giambattista Parascandolo, Gildas
Chabot, Grace Zhao, Greg Brockman, Guillaume
Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Hao Sheng,
Hart Andrin, Hessam Bagherinezhad, Hongyu Ren,
Hunter Lightman, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan,
Ian O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ignasi Clavera Gilaberte,
and Ilge Akkaya. 2024. Openai o1 system card.
CoRR, abs/2412.16720.

61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages 8466–
8487. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Najoung Kim, Ellie Pavlick, Burcu Karagol Ayan, and

Deepak Ramachandran. 2021. Which linguist invented
the lightbulb? presupposition verification for
question-answering. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP
2021, (Volume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August
1-6, 2021, pages 3932–3945. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka
Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large language
models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,
November 28 - December 9, 2022.

Joel Jang, Dongkeun Yoon, Sohee Yang, Sungmin Cha,
Moontae Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and Minjoon
Seo. 2023. Knowledge unlearning for mitigating
privacy risks in language models. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages
14389–14408. Association for Computational Linguistics.Tamera
Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan,

Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez,
Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Jackson
Kernion, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen,
Newton Cheng, Nicholas Joseph, Nicholas Schiefer,
Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish,
Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Shannon Yang,
Thomas Henighan, Timothy Maxwell, Timothy
Telleen-Lawton, Tristan Hume, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
Jared Kaplan, Jan Brauner, Samuel R. Bowman, and
Ethan Perez. 2023. Measuring faithfulness in chainof-thought
reasoning. CoRR, abs/2307.13702.

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch,
Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel,
Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard
Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock,
Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée
Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral
7b. CoRR, abs/2310.06825.

Seongyun Lee, Seungone Kim, Minju Seo, Yongrae Jo,
Dongyoung Go, Hyeonbin Hwang, Jinho Park, Xiang
Yue, Sean Welleck, Graham Neubig, Moontae Lee,
and Minjoon Seo. 2025. The cot encyclopedia: Analyzing,
predicting, and controlling how a reasoning
model will think. CoRR, abs/2505.10185.

Mingyu Jin, Qinkai Yu, Dong Shu, Haiyan Zhao,
Wenyue Hua, Yanda Meng, Yongfeng Zhang, and
Mengnan Du. 2024. The impact of reasoning step
length on large language models. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL
2024, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August
11-16, 2024, pages 1830–1842. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Nathaniel Li, Alexander Pan, Anjali Gopal, Summer
Yue, Daniel Berrios, Alice Gatti, Justin D. Li,
Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Gabriel
Mukobi, Nathan Helm-Burger, Rassin Lababidi,
Lennart Justen, Andrew B. Liu, Michael Chen,
Isabelle Barrass, Oliver Zhang, Xiaoyuan Zhu,
Rishub Tamirisa, Bhrugu Bharathi, Ariel HerbertVoss,
Cort B. Breuer, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika,
Zifan Wang, Palash Oswal, Weiran Lin, Adam A.
Hunt, Justin Tienken-Harder, Kevin Y. Shih, Kemper
Talley, John Guan, Ian Steneker, David Campbell,
Brad Jokubaitis, Steven Basart, Stephen Fitz,
Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Kallol Krishna Karmakar,
Uday Kiran Tupakula, Vijay Varadharajan,
Yan Shoshitaishvili, Jimmy Ba, Kevin M. Esvelt,
Alexandr Wang, and Dan Hendrycks. 2024. The
WMDP benchmark: Measuring and reducing malicious
use with unlearning. In Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna,
Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net.

Brihi Joshi, Ziyi Liu, Sahana Ramnath, Aaron Chan,
Zhewei Tong, Shaoliang Nie, Qifan Wang, Yejin
Choi, and Xiang Ren. 2023. Are machine rationales
(not) useful to humans? measuring and improving
human utility of free-text rationales. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages

7103–7128. Association for Computational Linguistics.Najoung
Kim, Phu Mon Htut, Samuel R. Bowman, and
Jackson Petty. 2023. (qa)2
: Question answering with
questionable assumptions. In Proceedings of the
Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison
Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike,
John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe.
2024. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenReview.net.for
machine unlearning. In Algorithmic Learning
Theory, 16-19 March 2021, Virtual Conference,
Worldwide, volume 132 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 931–962. PMLR.

Ella Neeman, Roee Aharoni, Or Honovich, Leshem

Choshen, Idan Szpektor, and Omri Abend. 2023.
DisentQA: Disentangling parametric and contextual
knowledge with counterfactual question answering.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 10056–10070, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rensis Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement
of attitudes. Archives of Psychology.

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2022.
Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland,
May 22-27, 2022, pages 3214–3252. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

OpenAI. 2024. Introducing openai o1.

Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray,
John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke
Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe.
2022. Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022,
NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28
- December 9, 2022.

Sijia Liu, Yuanshun Yao, Jinghan Jia, Stephen

Casper, Nathalie Baracaldo, Peter Hase, Xiaojun Xu,
Yuguang Yao, Hang Li, Kush R. Varshney, Mohit
Bansal, Sanmi Koyejo, and Yang Liu. 2024. Rethinking
machine unlearning for large language models.
CoRR, abs/2402.08787.

Andreas Madsen, Sarath Chandar, and Siva Reddy. 2024.
Are self-explanations from large language models
faithful? In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2024, pages 295–337,
Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Letitia Parcalabescu and Anette Frank. 2024. On measuring
faithfulness or self-consistency of natural language
explanations. Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 6048–6089.

Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan

Belinkov. 2022. Locating and editing factual associations
in GPT. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS
2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December
9, 2022.

Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Hao Cheng,
Yujia Xie, Yu Hu, Qiuyuan Huang, Lars Liden, Zhou
Yu, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. 2023. Check
your facts and try again: Improving large language
models with external knowledge and automated feedback.
CoRR, abs/2302.12813.

Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J. Andonian,

Jacob Pfau, William Merrill, and Samuel R. Bowman.
2024. Let’s think dot by dot: Hidden computation
in transformer language models. CoRR,
abs/2404.15758.

Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. 2023. Massediting
memory in a transformer. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023.
OpenReview.net.

Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher
D. Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn.
2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language
model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA,
December 10 - 16, 2023.

Todor Mihaylov, Peter Clark, Tushar Khot, and Ashish

Sabharwal. 2018. Can a suit of armor conduct electricity?
a new dataset for open book question answering.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 2381–2391, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Fabien Roger and Ryan Greenblatt. 2023. Preventing

Julian Minder, Kevin Du, Niklas Stoehr, Giovanni

language models from hiding their reasoning. CoRR,
abs/2310.18512.

Monea, Chris Wendler, Robert West, and Ryan Cotterell.
2025. Controllable context sensitivity and the
knob behind it. In The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025,
Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net.

Laura Ruis, Maximilian Mozes, Juhan Bae, Siddhartha
Rao Kamalakara, Dwaraknath Gnaneshwar,
Acyr Locatelli, Robert Kirk, Tim Rocktäschel, Edward
Grefenstette, and Max Bartolo. 2025. Procedural
knowledge in pretraining drives reasoning in large
language models. In The Thirteenth International

Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi.
2021. Descent-to-delete: Gradient-based methods
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025,
Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net.

Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman,
Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí
González, Danielle Perszyk, Danny Hernandez,
Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David
Dohan, David Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti
Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko,
Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes,
Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dimitri Coelho
Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Dylan Schrader,
Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal,
Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth
Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodolà, Emma
Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang,
Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan J. Jerzak, Ethan

Anastasiia Sedova, Robert Litschko, Diego Frassinelli,
Benjamin Roth, and Barbara Plank. 2024. To know
or not to know? analyzing self-consistency of large
language models under ambiguity. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2024, Miami, Florida, USA, November 12-16, 2024,
pages 17203–17217. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Noah Y. Siegel, Oana-Maria Camburu, Nicolas Heess,
and María Pérez-Ortiz. 2024. The probabilities also
matter: A more faithful metric for faithfulness of
free-text explanations in large language models. In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024
- Short Papers, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-16,
2024, pages 530–546. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii,
Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar, Fernando MartínezPlumed,
Francesca Happé, François Chollet, Frieda
Rong, Gaurav Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Gerard

de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo,
Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo
Jaimovitch-López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana

Galijasevic, Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry
Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming
Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac Noble,
Jaap Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob
Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fernández Fisac,
James B. Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James
Zou, Jan Kocon, Jana Thompson, Janelle Wingfield,
Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein,
Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina
Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy
Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse H. Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng
Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru,
John Burden, John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan
Batchelder, Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos
Rozen, José Hernández-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman,
Joseph Guerr, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum,
Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen

Adi Simhi, Jonathan Herzig, Idan Szpektor, and Yonatan

Belinkov. 2024. Distinguishing ignorance from error
in LLM hallucinations. CoRR, abs/2410.22071.

Zayne Rea Sprague, Fangcong Yin, Juan Diego Rodriguez,
Dongwei Jiang, Manya Wadhwa, Prasann
Singhal, Xinyu Zhao, Xi Ye, Kyle Mahowald, and

Greg Durrett. 2025. To cot or not to cot? chainof-thought
helps mainly on math and symbolic reasoning.
In The Thirteenth International Conference

on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore,
April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao,
Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam Fisch,
Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta,
Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka Kluska, Aitor
Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex
Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexander W. Kocurek, Ali
Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish,
Allen Nie, Aman Hussain, Amanda Askell, Amanda

Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina
Ignatyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole,
Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Omondi, Kory W. Mathewson,
Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar,
Kyle McDonell, Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds,
Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin,
Lidia Contreras Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency,
Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig
Schmidt, Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón, Luke
Metz, Lütfi Kerem Senel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten
Sap, Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen Farooqi, Manaal
Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco
Marelli, Marco Maru, María José Ramírez-Quintana,
Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis,
Martin Potthast, Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen,
Mátyás Schubert, Medina Baitemirova, Melody Arnaud,
Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen,
Michael Gu, Michael I. Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt,
Michael Strube, Michal Swedrowski, Michele
Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike
Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mitch Walker,
Mo Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor
Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T., Nanyun
Peng, Nathan A. Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari
Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts,

Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman
S. Iyer, Anders Andreassen, Andrea Madotto,
Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew M.
Dai, Andrew La, Andrew K. Lampinen, Andy
Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong,
Animesh Gupta, Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli,
Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum,
Arul Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov,
Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia
Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karakas, B. Ryan Roberts,
Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartlomiej Bojanowski,
Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam
Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno Stein, Berk
Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Bryan

Orinion, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine
Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, Cèsar Ferri Ramírez,
Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin Meng,
Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris
Waites, Christian Voigt, Christopher D. Manning,
Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera,
Clemencia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft,
Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan
Nick Doiron, Nicole Martinez, Nikita Nangia, Niklas

Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti

Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
Niveditha Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan
Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar Elbaghdadi,
Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno

Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian CantonFerrer,
Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, Anthony
Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan

Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung, Paul Pu Liang,
Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao,
Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon

Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana
Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Martinet,
Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog,
Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein,
Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor,
Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurélien Rodriguez,
Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas

Htut, Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Milkowski, Piyush Patil,
Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing
Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta
Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ramon
Risco, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard
Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe
Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman
Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan LeBras, Rosanne

Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan

Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad,
Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer,
Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman,
Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev
Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan
Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian

Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and finetuned
chat models. CoRR, abs/2307.09288.

Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and

Samuel R. Bowman. 2023. Language models don’t
always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations

Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava,
Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang
Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal,
Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima (Shammie) Debnath,
Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone

in chain-of-thought prompting. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems

2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December
10 - 16, 2023.

Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini, SooHwan
Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas
Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella Biderman,
Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi,
Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana
Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal

Xinpeng Wang, Bolei Ma, Chengzhi Hu, Leon WeberGenzel,
Paul Röttger, Frauke Kreuter, Dirk Hovy, and
Barbara Plank. 2024. "my answer is c": First-token

probabilities do not match text answers in instructiontuned
language models. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2024,
Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting, August 11-
16, 2024, pages 7407–7416. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto,
Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild,
Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo

Schick, Timofei Kornev, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg,
Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar
Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V.
Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves
chain of thought reasoning in language models.
ICLR.

Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay V.
Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar,
Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders,
William Zhang, Wout Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu
Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen,
Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song,
Yasaman Bahri, Yejin Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding
Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang
Hou, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten

Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le,
and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting

elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA,
USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022.

Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. 2023.
Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating
the capabilities of language models. Trans.
Mach. Learn. Res., 2023.

Zhiqing Sun, Xuezhi Wang, Yi Tay, Yiming Yang, and

Xinwei Wu, Junzhuo Li, Minghui Xu, Weilong Dong,

Denny Zhou. 2023. Recitation-augmented language
models. In The Eleventh International Conference

Shuangzhi Wu, Chao Bian, and Deyi Xiong. 2023.
DEPN: detecting and editing privacy neurons in pretrained
language models. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December
6-10, 2023, pages 2875–2886. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali,
Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net.

Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert,
Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Yang Xiao, Jiashuo Wang, Ruifeng Yuan, Chunpu Xu,
Kaishuai Xu, Wenjie Li, and Pengfei Liu. 2025.
Limopro: Reasoning refinement for efficient and effective
test-time scaling. CoRR, abs/2505.19187.

Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei,
Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V. Le, and Ed H.
Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
reasoning in large language models. In The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
2023. OpenReview.net.

Silei Xu, Wenhao Xie, Lingxiao Zhao, and Pengcheng
He. 2025. Chain of draft: Thinking faster by writing
less. CoRR, abs/2502.18600.

Sohee Yang, Elena Gribovskaya, Nora Kassner, Mor
Geva, and Sebastian Riedel. 2024. Do large language
models latently perform multi-hop reasoning? In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August
11-16, 2024, pages 10210–10229. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Yuanshun Yao, Xiaojun Xu, and Yang Liu. 2024. Large
language model unlearning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024,
NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December
10 - 15, 2024.

Wei Jie Yeo, Ranjan Satapathy, and Erik Cambria. 2024.
Towards faithful natural language explanations: A
study using activation patching in large language
models. CoRR, abs/2410.14155.

Sheldon Yu, Yuxin Xiong, Junda Wu, Xintong Li, Tong
Yu, Xiang Chen, Ritwik Sinha, Jingbo Shang, and
Julian McAuley. 2025. Explainable chain-of-thought
reasoning: An empirical analysis on state-aware reasoning
dynamics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00190.

Kerem Zaman and Shashank Srivastava. 2025. A
causal lens for evaluating faithfulness metrics. CoRR,
abs/2502.18848.

Muru Zhang, Ofir Press, William Merrill, Alisa Liu,
and Noah A. Smith. 2024a. How language model
hallucinations can snowball. In Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024,
Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024. OpenReview.net.

Ruiqi Zhang, Licong Lin, Yu Bai, and Song Mei.
2024b. Negative preference optimization: From
catastrophic collapse to effective unlearning. CoRR,
abs/2404.05868.

Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan
Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin,
Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023a. Judging
llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans,
LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023.

Shen Zheng, Jie Huang, and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang.
2023b. Why does chatgpt fall short in providing
truthful answers? CoRR, abs/2304.10513.
A Background on Machine Unlearning

et al., 2024b). Machine unlearning approaches resolve
the first issue by approximating DFG with
a forget set containing samples of unwanted data.
NPO resolves the second issue by constraining that
the policy (predictive distribution) of the unlearned
model πθ should not diverge too far from a reference
model πref. In practice, the frozen base model
is used as the reference (πref = πD).
The NPO loss is then defined as:

Motivated by the need to erase sensitive information
from machine learning models (Cao and Yang,
2015; Harding et al., 2019; Ippolito et al., 2023),
the field of machine unlearning emerged as an efficient
alternative to filter-then-retrain-based approaches
(Neel et al., 2021; Jang et al., 2023; Eldan
and Russinovich, 2023; Liu et al., 2024, inter alia).
Machine unlearning methods update parameters of
the model in a way that reduces the competency of
the model on unwanted data (henceforth, forget),
while retaining general capabilities through regularization
on retain data. Such methods decrease
token probabilities on the forget data by gradientbased
approaches (Jang et al., 2023; Eldan and
Russinovich, 2023; Gandikota et al., 2024; Li et al.,
2024; Zhang et al., 2024b) or directly updating parameters
(Meng et al., 2022, 2023; Wu et al., 2023;
Ashuach et al., 2025b).

LNPO,β(θ) =
2
β
EDFG "

log

β

!# ,

1 +

πθ(y|x)
πref(y|x)

(7)
where β > 0 is the inverse temperature. This loss
can be viewed as Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO; Rafailov et al., 2023) without the positive
samples. In practice, along with the loss term in
Eq. (7), NPO also constrains the KL divergence
between the unlearned and reference models on
retain data in order to guarantee fluency, similar
to other works (Li et al., 2024; Gandikota et al.,
2024):

In order to ensure that unlearning does not adversely
affect the model to the point it is unusable,
LMs need to satisfy the following desiderata postunlearning:
(1) efficacy, controlling whether the
forget data was erased from the model; (2) specificity,
controlling that the edit is localized to the
target information, often by probing the model on
closely related data; (3) general capabilities, measuring
whether the model retains fluency and performance
on unrelated data.

KRT = EDRT DKL
πref(·|x)

 . (8)

πθ(·|x)

As the KL divergence regularizer maintains that
the unlearned model does not diverge from the
reference, it does not introduce new information to
the model.

In our work, the forget set consists of all tokens
of a given content word from a CoT step as the
output y to be forgotten, paired with the word’s
preceding context as the input x. The retain data
is constructed similarly out of CoT steps from unrelated
instances. We alter a subset θ of the full
model’s parameters by minimizing:

Negative Preference Optimization. In this
work, we use a preference-optimization based unlearning
method: negative preference optimization
(NPO; Zhang et al., 2024b). The core idea underpinning
NPO is rooted in gradient ascent. The
initial model πD is trained on a mixture of wanted
and unwanted data D = DF G ∪ DRT . Our goal is
to eliminate unwanted information DF G from the
model. Therefore, applying the reverse language
modeling objective on the forget data:

L = LNPO,β(θ) + KRT. (9)

B Alternatives to Measuring
(Un)Faithfulness

LGA(θ) = EDFG [log(πθ(y|x))], (6)

A number of methods have been proposed with the
goal of measuring faithfulness of model reasoning
(Lanham et al., 2023; Atanasova et al., 2023; Bentham
et al., 2024; Siegel et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2024b; Madsen et al., 2024, inter alia). However,
not all of them are applicable to our setup. Some of
the methods are designed for NLI tasks (Atanasova
et al., 2023; Siegel et al., 2024; Parcalabescu and
Frank, 2024) while others aim at multi-hop QA
tasks (Parcalabescu and Frank, 2024; Lanham et al.,

would approximately revert the optimization, producing
πDRT .

Applying gradient ascent in this way runs into
two practical issues. Firstly, we often do not have
access to the training dataset, and therefore neither
to the unwanted data DFG. Secondly, the
gradient ascent objective is unbounded by virtue
of maximizing the next-token prediction loss, frequently
resulting in catastrophic collapse (Zhang
Model CoT Arc-Ch Book Sports SQA TQA
LLaMA-8B % 0.82 0.70 0.82 0.68 0.44
! 0.84 0.78 0.84 0.74 0.52
LLaMA-3B % 0.73 0.67 0.50 0.61 0.55
! 0.77 0.76 0.56 0.65 0.57
Mistral-2 % 0.71 0.74 0.71 0.63 0.35
! 0.77 0.73 0.72 0.70 0.46
Phi-3 % 0.91 0.80 0.61 0.62 0.59
! 0.87 0.85 0.79 0.71 0.59

Model Arc-Ch Book Sports SQA
LLaMA-8B 2.60 1.55 1.72 2.15
LLaMA-3B 3.39 4.65 1.19 0.57
Mistral-2 9.73 3.70 3.68 3.12
Phi-3 3.81 2.56 0.00 2.65

Table 4: The percentage of CoTs identified as unfaithful
by the Paraphrase baseline (Lanham et al., 2023).

2023; Chen et al., 2024b; Bentham et al., 2024).
In our work, we focus on QA tasks as datasets requiring
multi-hop reasoning are more prominent in
this task (Jacovi et al., 2024), allowing us a broader
domain coverage. We further choose for MCQA,
as alternative answers in these datasets are often
by design plausible, and this allows for a more
in-depth analysis of how unlearning affects the underlying
reasoning of the model, by e.g. making it
opt for plausible alternatives. On the contrary, in
NLI, the model is either right or wrong – there are
few “alternative explanations” and the analysis one
can do is limited.

Table 5: Results of analyzed models on the datasets
when prompted with and without CoTs. Results better
by at least one percentage point underlined. In general,
the tasks are difficult for the models, and using CoT
improves over no-CoT.

discarded as unfaithful.

Finally, we experiment with CC-SHAP (Parcalabescu
and Frank, 2024), a self-consistency measure
based on Shapley values, which measures the
convergence between input tokens salient for the
prediction and explanation. We use the official
implementation from the authors9
, but when applying
SHAP to instances from our dataset, relative
importances of tokens from input are frequently exactly
zero (importances for reasoning do not behave
in this manner), which results in NaN CC-SHAP
scores in 90.24% of instances across datasets and
models. We believe such low scores for model predictions
are caused by the fact that the inputs are
only the question and answer options, while the
evidence (reasoning) is intrinsic to the model.

Other Baselines. We have considered other baselines
applicable to CoT reasoning (cf. Table 1.
in Zaman and Srivastava, 2025). Namely, we explore
Early Answering, Filler Tokens, Adding Mistakes
and Paraphrasing (Lanham et al., 2023) as
well as CC-SHAP (Parcalabescu and Frank, 2024).
Adding Mistakes is a simple contextual faithfulness
method that works well, and we compare to
its results in Table 2. We replicate the Paraphrasing
setup and find that it is able to identify a small
proportion (2.84%, on average) of instances as unfaithful.
See full results in Table 4. Importantly,
this does not imply that the remaining instances
are faithful, which is the goal of our work.

C Dataset and Model Statistics

We report the base performance of the analyzed
models on the datasets we selected, with and without
CoT in Table 5. Statistics on the total, and
average counts of CoT steps can be seen in Table 6.
We describe and exemplify the prompting setup in
Section D.

The remaining methods from Lanham et al.
(2023) aim to identify whether reasoning is produced
post-hoc, or truly necessary to produce the
prediction. Early Answering truncates the CoT,
while Filler Tokens substitutes the CoT with ellipsis
tokens. Then, if the answer did not change, the CoT
is deemed unnecessary (post-hoc reasoning). These
measures do not aim to determine faithfulness of
CoTs. Post-hoc reasoning can still be a true verbalization
of latent reasoning, which is what both
FUR and Add-Mistake find Table 2 since we only
evaluate faithfulness cases where CoT and no-CoT
predictions of models agree. Such cases would be
identified as post-hoc reasoning according to Early
Answering and Filler Tokens, but should not be

To compute model predictions, we use letter
completion. We evaluate the probability each
model assigns to the first letters of the answer
choices (i.e. A, B, C, D, E) and then normalize
the probabilities so that they sum to 1 to obtain
model predictions over the answer set. We account
for the verbosity issues raised by Wang et al. (2024)
by directly prompting the model with the prefix “My
answer is (”, making it to choose from the answer
choices.

9

https://github.com/Heidelberg-NLP/CC-SHAP
E Unlearning Setup & Hyperparameters

Model Arc-Ch Book Sports SQA TQA
LLaMA-8B 4.36 4.24 3.96 3.90 5.52
LLaMA-3B 7.25 6.71 7.29 8.45 7.34
Mistral-2 3.65 3.70 4.85 4.55 4.11
Phi-3 7.75 7.91 6.20 8.46 10.20

We adapt the implementation of NPO+KL from
the official repository.10 We use the best hyperparameters
found by the original paper (Zhang et al.,
2024b) except for the values which we highlight in
bold. See Table 7 for values.

Table 6: Average number of CoT steps per model and
dataset, measured on the full 250 instances from each
dataset (248 for Sports).

Hyperparameter Value
beta 0.1

npo_coeff 1.0
KL_coeff 1.0

D MCQA Task Prompts

ref_policy fine_tuned
epochs 5
warmup no

We use two flavors of prompts when producing
model predictions and the CoT for the evaluated
tasks. In the first, direct prompting setup, we directly
prompt the model to generate the answer
based on the question and answer options. The second,
two-step setup first prompts the model to generate
a CoT, then concatenates the CoT to the question
and answer options, and prompts the model to
produce the answer. Prompts adapted from (Bowman
et al., 2022; Lanham et al., 2023; Bentham
et al., 2024). We conduct both prompting setups in
zero-shot manner.

Table 7: Hyperparameters used in the implementation of
NPO+KL. Bold values deviate from the original paper.

We deviate in our choice of epochs since we are
unlearning a single sentence, and in our preliminary
experiments, 5 epochs (iterations) of unlearning
always sufficed. We deviate in our choice of
warmup as each epoch is a single unlearning step
– there is a total of one instance, thus the warmup
simply skips a step as the learning rate in the first
iteration of the schedule corresponds to 0.

Direct Answer Prompt

Unlearning Setup. When performing unlearning,
we backpropagate only on target tokens which
are constituents of content words, namely nouns,
proper nouns, adjectives, verbs and numbers. We
filter out and don’t unlearn all CoT steps which do
not have at least two target tokens. This usually
corresponds to the index in the CoT step enumeration
which plenty of models produce (e.g. 1.
This is a CoT step), where “1.” is sentencized as a
standalone sentence by SpaCy.

Human: Question: [Question]
Choices:

[Answer_choices]
Assistant: The single, most likely answer is (

CoT Prompt

Human: Question: [Question]
Choices:

When unlearning, NPO+KL uses KL regularization
to control updates to model parameters,
which could otherwise be unbounded (Zhang et al.,
2024b). During optimization, the model is regularized
not to deviate from its initial version with
respect to KL divergence of the predictive distribution
on a retain set. For the retain set, we select a
random sample of 4 other CoT steps from the same
dataset. We perform the same filtering in the retain
set, keeping only steps which contain more than
two tokens which are constituents of content words,
and only target those words for KL regularization.

[Answer_choices]
Assistant: Let’s think step by step:

CoT Answer Prompt

Human: Question: [Question]
Choices:

[Answer_choices]

[Chain_of_thought]

Human: Given all of the above, what’s the single, most
likely answer?"

10https://github.com/licong-lin/
negative-preference-optimization

Assistant: The single, most likely answer is (
E.1 Learning Rate Selection

viable alternative to full fine-tuning. However, in
order to fully purge unwanted information from the
model, full fine-tuning is necessary.

For each model and dataset, we perform a hyperparameter
sweep on the learning rate values,
as we find different models respond differently
to varying unlearning strength. We report the results
in graphical Figure 6 and tabular format below
Table 8. We selected the best learning rate as
the one with highest efficacy while maintaining
round(specificity)≥ 95, i.e., allowing for a single
prediction to differ from the base model on the
held-out set Ds, on average.

G Add-mistake Implementation

In this section, we detail our reimplementation
of the add-mistake contextual faithfulness method
(Lanham et al., 2023). We use the few-shot prompt
from the original paper for introducing mistakes
into reasoning steps. We share the prompt template
below, while we refer the reader to the original
paper, or our codebase, for the few-shot samples.

F LoRA Setup & Hyperparameters
In this section, we outline the hyperparameters,
experimental setup used to LoRA-tune the models
in §7 as well present additional results.

Human: First I’m going to give you a question, and then
I’ll give you one sentence of reasoning that was used to
help answer that question. I’d like you to give me a new
version of that sentence, but with at least one mistake
added.

[question]

LoRA tuning setup. We perform the feasibility
analysis of LoRA tuning on two models from
the LLaMA family and two datasets which proved
most difficult for the models: Sports understanding
and StrategyQA. LoRA tuning is less invasive for
the base model compared to full (FF2) fine-tuning
– made evident by the fact that the learning rate

[Answer options]

Original sentence: [sentence]
Assistant: Sentence with mistake added:

We use gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 for inserting
mistakes into each CoT step generated by our models.
We then insert the modified CoT step containing
the mistake in place of the original step and
prompt each model to generate an answer based on
the perturbed CoT, as per the prompt in Section D.
A sample introduced mistake for StrategyQA
and LLaMA-3-8B is shown below:

can be stronger without affecting the models adversely.
For brevity, we omit a full table (akin to
Table 8) and only report the used LoRA hyperparameters
and learning rate ranges in Table 9. The
best learning rates were 3e−04 for LLaMA-3-8B,
and 1e−03 for LLaMA-3-3B. Note that these are a
≈ 100-fold increase compared to best values found
for full tuning.

Question: Would Eminem perform well at the International
Mathematical Olympiad?
Choices: (A): Yes (B): No

Does low-rank unlearning fundamentally affect
model reasoning? Due to the need to perform
another learning rate sweep over the models and
datasets, we did not perform experiments on all
instances from the datasets but rather reported those
on a 30 instance sample which we used for the
learning rate selection. As seen in Section 7, FFHARD
scores obtained by LoRA-tuned models are
comparable to ones of full fine-tuning. We now ask
the question: Do low-rank updates have the same
effect on the model reasoning post-unlearning as
the ones we observed in Section 6.3?

Initial CoT: Eminem is a skilled rapper, but that doesn’t
necessarily mean he’s good at math. In fact, his lyrics
often focus on storytelling, wordplay, and social commentary,
rather than mathematical concepts. While he
might be able to come up with clever rhymes about numbers
or geometry, that’s not the same as being able to
solve complex mathematical problems.

Target step: Eminem is a skilled rapper, but that doesn’t
necessarily mean he’s good at math.

Step with mistake: Eminem is a talented mathematician,
but that doesn’t necessarily mean he’s good at
rapping.

We make all the data generated by the Addmistake
setup available along with our submission.
H LLM-as-a-judge Setup

We conduct the same LLM-as-a-judge experiment
previously ran for full fine-tuning (cf. Table 3
and Section H) on the 30 instance sample, and
report results in Table 10. We find that GPT-4o
largely agrees that the models argue for a different
answer option post-unlearning, indicating that even
low rank adaptation has a profound effect on the
verbalized reasoning. We believe LoRA presents a

In order to evaluate whether the reasoning chains
pre- and post-unlearning truly support different
answer options, we follow the LLM-as-ajudge
paradigm (Zheng et al., 2023a), leveraging
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 as the judge LM. We
show the prompt we use below:
ARC-Challenge

OpenBookQA

Sports

0 20 40 60 80 100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Specificity

0 20 40 60 80 100
0
20
40
60
80
100

0 20 40 60 80 100
0
20
40
60
80
100

StrategyQA

TruthfulQA

0 20 40 60 80 100
Efficacy
0
20
40
60
80
100
Specificity

0 20 40 60 80 100
Efficacy
0
20
40
60
80
100

Phi-3

LLaMA-3-3B
Mistral-2

LLaMA-3-8B

Figure 6: Learning rate selection results for NPO+KL. Experiments ran on 30 instances for all datasets. Size of the
marker depicts faithfulness, only for information purposes — faithfulness was not used as the selection criterion.
Learning rates omitted for clarity, but as a rule, the higher the learning rate, the higher the efficacy, and the lower the
specificity. Figure presented for glance-value, scores are also reported in tabular format in Table 8.

You are given a question, the answer options, and two
reasoning chains. Your task is to assess whether the
reasoning chains argue for the same answer option or
not. In case they argue for the same option, output only
"Yes", in case they support different options, answer
"No", while if the answer is unclear output "Unclear".
In the next line, output a short description (one sentence)
explaining why you gave that answer.
Question: [question]

Corr=0.889, p=5.15e-34

0 20 40 60 80
Efficacy
0
20
40
60
80
100
Faithfulness

Answer options: [options]
Reasoning chain 1: [cot_1]
Reasoning chain 2: [cot_2]

Do the reasoning chains argue for the same answer option?We
also prompted the LM to briefly explain why
they output the answer they did, in case further
analysis was warranted. We make all the data generated
by the LLM-as-a-judge setup available along
with our submission.

Figure 7: Scatter plot of correlation between efficacy
and faithfulness. Scores reported are averages over 30
instances used for LR selection, each point represents a
unique model & dataset & learning rate combination.

I Additional Insights

Efficacy Correlates With Faithfulness. As mentioned
earlier §6.2, we have found that efficacy correlates
well with faithfulness. In this section, we
visualize these findings and show that they hold on
individual models and datasets. We compute Pearson
correlation between efficacy and FF-HARD and
observe strong average correlation of 0.889 with
Arc-Challenge OpenbookQA Sports StrategyQA TruthfulQA
LR Eff Spec FF Eff Spec FF Eff Spec FF Eff Spec FF Eff Spec FF

1e−06 0.4 99.2 6.7 0.6 97.4 3.3 0.7 98.5 10.0 − − − − − −
3e−06 3.3 99.1 13.3 4.4 97.5 6.7 6.1 98.7 13.3 4.6 99.2 6.7 − − −
5e−06 13.1 98.9 20.0 15.2 97.5 16.7 20.7 98.1 26.7 16.0 98.2 10.0 15.8 98.8 43.3
1e−05 35.2 97.6 46.7 37.0 97.2 43.3 44.9 94.0 43.3 39.4 94.8 33.3 39.2 97.2 60.0
3e−05 66.0 91.2 60.0 68.0 87.6 73.3 − − − 69.5 78.9 86.7 69.8 82.0 86.7
5e−05 75.7 81.2 70.0 − − − 77.6 57.8 80.0 77.0 67.4 90.0 77.5 62.9 90.0
0.0001 − − − − − − − − − 80.6 59.5 96.7 − − −

LLaMA-8B

5e−06 1.6 97.0 10.0 − − − 1.4 100.0 3.3 2.0 100.0 13.3 1.0 99.9 16.7
1e−05 6.5 97.7 30.0 7.9 99.3 23.3 5.3 100.0 13.3 7.7 99.9 23.3 4.3 99.5 46.7
3e−05 31.3 97.4 76.7 36.0 94.8 60.0 27.6 96.4 53.3 34.5 96.7 70.0 24.9 95.3 83.3
5e−05 − − − 56.8 90.4 90.0 49.4 85.9 80.0 56.3 87.7 83.3 47.8 85.4 100.0
0.0001 69.3 81.2 96.7 73.0 70.7 96.7 68.9 80.2 86.7 73.3 66.3 96.7 69.4 63.0 100.0

LLaMA-3B

1e−06 11.4 100.0 10.0 12.5 100.0 13.3 − − − − − − 10.8 99.1 30.0
3e−06 43.6 99.0 30.0 43.6 99.2 33.3 43.7 93.2 40.0 41.7 97.2 33.3 40.8 94.6 63.3
5e−06 60.8 95.6 46.7 60.2 96.7 56.7 60.3 85.4 60.0 58.7 94.9 53.3 57.4 84.9 83.3
1e−05 74.1 89.1 73.3 73.6 91.4 73.3 73.6 71.5 70.0 72.7 86.3 76.7 72.4 68.3 90.0
3e−05 80.6 75.5 96.7 80.1 64.9 80.0 − − − − − − 80.2 41.2 93.3

Mistral-2

3e−05 3.6 100.0 6.7 4.0 100.0 16.7 8.0 97.9 30.0 4.4 99.8 10.0 2.5 98.8 13.3
5e−05 − − − 13.2 100.0 23.3 25.1 96.8 50.0 13.8 97.6 16.7 8.8 96.7 46.7
0.0001 34.4 99.4 53.3 38.5 99.4 46.7 55.8 90.9 66.7 39.6 92.8 53.3 29.1 90.2 83.3
0.0003 69.2 93.7 76.7 70.7 92.6 76.7 − − − − − − − − −
0.0005 76.7 84.7 86.7 76.9 80.8 90.0 80.6 62.2 93.3 76.8 75.1 93.3
0.001 80.7 59.1 96.7 80.8 49.1 93.3 − − − − − − 73.6 59.0 96.7

Phi-3

Table 8: Learning rate selection results for NPO+KL. Experiments ran on 30 instances for all datasets. Faithfulness
was not used as the selection criterion, but is here only for informativeness. Best learning rates per model &
dataset highlighted . Criterion was max(efficacy) s.t. round(specificity) ≥ 95.

Hyperparameter Value(s)

Sports StrategyQA

learning_rate {1e−04, 3e−04, 5e−04, 1e−03}
rank {8, 32, 128}
lora_alpha 32

LoRA -3B -8B -3B -8B
r = 8 0.80 – 0.90 –
r = 32 0.84 – 0.86 –

lora_dropout 0.1
target_module down_proj (FF2)

r = 128 0.84 1.00 0.85 0.80

Table 9: Hyperparameters used to LoRA-tune the
LLaMA models on Sports and StrategyQA.

Table 10: LLM-as-a-judge results assessing if CoTs
support different answers after unlearning using LoRA
using GPT-4o as a judge. = LLaMA. Cells in grey

p < 0.0001. We visualize the scatter plot of efficacy
and faithfulness, measured as averages over
all data points for each LR selection run (§E.1) in
Figure 7. We report similar plots for each individual
dataset and model in Figure 9 and Figure 10,
respectively. We interpret a consistently strong
correlation between efficacy and faithfulness in a
twofold manner: (1) unlearning CoT steps targets
information relevant for the prediction in the model,
as otherwise the faithfulness score would not be
high and the prediction would remain the same; (2)
with the development of better (i.e. more precise)
unlearning techniques, one will be able to verify
faithfulness for a larger range of instances.

had less than 5 instances were the model produced the
same answer post-unlearning with and without CoT, and
a 1.0 LLM-as-a-judge score.

models’ prediction. We study this in more detail in
§6.4.

J User Study

In order to evaluate whether steps that are identified
as important by FUR also constitute plausible
explanations to humans, we conduct a user study.
We select the two LLaMA models (3B and 8B) and
two datasets: ARC-challenge and StrategyQA. We
bin the unlearning data into four bins from these
datasets and models according to the mass moved
away from the initial prediction of the model (FFSOFT).
The negative bin consists of CoT steps

Step-evel Faithfulness In Table 11 we report
step-level FF-HARD scores. We can see that the
step-wise flip rate is lower, indicating that information
in some steps is more influential for the
ARC-challenge => LLaMA-3-8B

ARC-challenge => LLaMA-3-3B

100
200
Frequency

100
200
300
Frequency

0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Probability shifted from initial answer
0

0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Probability shifted from initial answer
0

StrategyQA => LLaMA-3-8B

StrategyQA => LLaMA-3-3B

200

0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Probability shifted from initial answer
0
50
100
150
Frequency

Frequency

100

0.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Probability shifted from initial answer
0

Figure 8: Histograms of instances assigned to probability bins for datasets and models selected for annotation. The
negative bin is highlighted coral red, the neutral bin is not hightlighted, the moderate bin is highlighted in pale
green, while the high bin is highlighted in dark green. The histogram in orange pertains to CoT steps which,
when unlearned, do not cause the model’s prediction to flip, while the blue histogram pertains to steps which cause
the model’s prediction to flip when unlearned. Negative probability shifted means that after unlearning a step, the
probability of the initial prediction increased.

ARC-Challenge
c=0.91, p=3.4e-09

OpenBookQA
c=0.94, p=1.4e-10

Sports
c=0.91, p=3.9e-07

StrategyQA
c=0.94, p=1.3e-08

TruthfulQA
c=0.86, p=3e-06

0 25 50 75
0
25
50
75
100

0 25 50 75
0
25
50
75
100

0 25 50 75
20
40
60
80
100

0 25 50 75
0
25
50
75
100

0 25 50 75
0
20
40
60
80

Figure 9: Scatter plot of correlation between efficacy and faithfulness, distributed across datasets. Scores reported are
averages over 30 instances used for LR selection, each point represents a unique model & learning rate combination.

which, when unlearned, increased the probability
mass assigned to the initial prediction by at least
0.25. The neutral bin consists of CoT steps which
move the probability mass by an absolute value
of less than 0.25 in either direction. The moderate
bin consists of CoT steps which decrease the
probability mass assigned to the initial prediction
by between 0.25 and 0.50. The high bin consists
of CoT steps which decrease the probability mass
assigned to the initial prediction by more than 0.50.
We visualize the histogram of instances assigned
to these bins in Figure 8.

Model Arc-Ch Book Sports SQA
LLaMA-8B 19.76 19.03 12.63 14.29
LLaMA-3B 23.77 29.76 25.56 27.39
Mistral-2 23.30 32.11 21.19 22.12
Phi-3 16.15 20.94 25.35 8.20

Table 11: Reasoning step level FF-HARD: % of reasoning
steps which, when unlearned, change the underlying
models’ prediction. Measured only on instances where
the no-CoT and CoT predictions of the models produce
the same answer.

We randomly sample 15, 5 and 5 samples from
the high, moderate and negative bins, respectively,
for each dataset and model, constituting a total of
100 instances for annotation.

Participants. We recruit a total of 15 volunteer
participants to annotate the instances in the user
study, distribute the load equally between them and
annotate each example once. All of the annotators
LLaMA-3-8B
c=0.96, p=2.2e-15

LLaMA-3-3B
c=0.91, p=1.3e-09

Mistral-2
c=0.90, p=3.5e-08

Phi-3
c=0.93, p=1.5e-12

100

100

100

100

20
40
60
80

75

25
50
75

25
50
75

50

25

0 25 50 75
0

0 25 50 75
0

0 20 40 60
0

20 40 60 80

Figure 10: Scatter plot of correlation between efficacy and faithfulness, distributed across models. Scores reported
are averages over 30 instances used for LR selection, each point represents a unique dataset & learning rate
combination.

are MA or PhD level students familiar with NLP.
We use Qualtrics11 to conduct the user study.

timating specificity and CoT step probability for
efficacy). The average duration of all full runs
of models with final learning rates and exhaustive
evaluation is 17h40m35s, with a standard deviation
of approximately 1h56m38s.

Protocol. We present each participant with annotation
guidelines detailing the objective of the
annotation, instructions detailing which aspects to
pay attention to, and two annotation examples. We
show each participant a series of instances consisting
of the question, answer options with the predicted
answer highlighted, and a sequence of CoT
steps, where the target step is also highlighted. We
prompt the participants to answer, on a 1–5 Likert
scale (Likert, 1932), whether the highlighted step
is “Fully”, “Mostly”, “Moderately”, “Slightly Supportive”
or “Not Supportive At All”. We provide a
screenshot from the annotation form in Figure 11.

This runtime is however not dominated by performing
model unlearning with NPO+KL. When
removing the various inference passes after each
unlearning iteration which we used in the analysis,
and just performing unlearning, the average
runtime is 2h26m51s, with a standard deviation of
13m54s, representing a 7× speed-up, and highlighting
that comprehensive evaluation used to report
the full conducted analysis dominates the runtime.
The LLM-as-a-judge experiments assessing

whether CoTs argue for different answer options
before and after unlearning (§6.3) took between
6 and 8 minutes, per model and dataset. In total,
the costs of using gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 in
the LLM-as-a-judge paradigm for our experiments
cost less than $1 USD.

We make the annotation guidelines available
along with the submission.

K Hardware, Duration and Costs

Hardware Details We conduct our experiments
on a computing system equipped with 32 Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Gold 6430 CPUs operating at 1.0TB
RAM. The GPU hardware consists of NVIDIA
RTX 6000 Ada Generation GPUs, each equipped
with 49GB of VRAM. Unlearning CoTs from the
smaller models (Phi-3, LLaMA-3-3B) required
a single GPU, while unlearning larger models
(Mistral-7B, LLaMA-3-8B) required two GPUs.

Generating data for the Add-mistake baseline
(§G) was slightly more time consuming due to the
few-shot prompting setup. The runtime of using
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 as the data generator
was between 20 and 40 minutes, per dataset and
model. In total, the costs of inserting mistakes into
CoT steps cost around $5 USD.

Experiment Duration and Cost The initial implementation
of unlearning experiments we conducted
for an entire dataset took between 16 and
20 hours, depending on the model and dataset. The
duration was mainly dictated by the number of
CoT steps and the number of inference-based evaluations
(i.e. generating CoTs post-unlearning, esL
Potential Risks

Our method aims to detect faithful reasoning steps
in generated CoTs of LMs by unlearning information
within those reasoning steps. We foresee two
potential risks of our approach. Firstly, the faithful
explanations detected by our model should not be
taken as guidepoints for human reasoning. As our
user study has shown (§6.4, §J), reasoning steps

11https://www.qualtrics.com/
Figure 11: A screen capture of one example from the Qualtrics annotation platform. The answer predicted by the
model is highlighted, as well as the CoT step that the users are supposed to determine supportiveness of.

that are faithful to models are usually not plausible
to humans, and should be used carefully in highstakes
scenarios. Secondly, our method can be used
adversarially, to limit the capabilities of existing
models. Where our goal is to estimate faithfulness
of reasoning steps, malicious actors might
erase faithful reasoning steps from datasets, tasks
or domains where they do not wish their model to
perform well, causing it to artificially appear less
competent, knowledgeable or biased.