High-Throughput Computation of Anharmonic Low-Frequency Protein Vibrations

Michael A. Sauer, Souvik Mondal, Madeline Cano, and Matthias Heyden∗
School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, U.S.A.
(Dated: June 19, 2025)

At room temperature, low frequency vibrations at far-infrared frequencies are thermally
excited (kBT > hν) and not restricted to harmonic fluctuations around a single potential
energy minimum. For folded proteins, these intrinsically anharmonic vibrations can contain
information on slow conformational transitions. Recently, we have developed FREquencySElective
ANharmonic (FRESEAN) mode analysis, a method based on time correlation
functions that isolates low-frequency vibrational motions from molecular dynamics simulation
trajectories without relying on harmonic approximations. We recently showed that
low-frequency vibrations obtained from FRESEAN mode analysis are effective collective
variables in enhanced sampling simulations of conformational ensembles.

arXiv:2506.15109v1 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 18 Jun 2025

However, FRESEAN mode analysis is based on velocity time correlations between all degrees
of freedom, which creates computational challenges for large biomolecules. To facilitate
future applications, we demonstrate here how coarse-graining of all-atom simulation trajectories
can be combined with FRESEAN mode analysis to extract information on low-frequency
vibrations at minimal computational cost.

average structure[6]. Similarly, time-lagged independent

I. INTRODUCTION

component analysis (TICA) is based on displacement
time correlations that identify CVs associated with slow
dynamics [7, 8]. However, these methods rely on direct
observations of rare events in long simulation trajectories
and their reproducibility and throughput is limited. Recent
machine learning approaches provide potential alternatives
through direct analysis of high-dimensional simulation
trajectories to generate latent space representations
that serve as CVs associated with underlying dynamic
processes [9–13].

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations routinely capture
atomic-level fluctuations and dynamic processes in
proteins and other biomolecules on timescales ranging
from femtoseconds to microseconds. However, protein
conformational transitions typically occur on micro- to
millisecond or even longer timescales, which remain challenging
to sample in conventional MD simulations. To
effectively capture protein dynamics in molecular dynamics
simulations, enhanced sampling techniques have been
developed to accelerate the sampling of protein conformational
landscapes.

Here, we pursue a different strategy. Promising CVs
that encode conformational transitions can also be obtained
from low-frequency vibrations. Low-frequency vibrational
modes are often estimated using harmonic normal
mode analysis, either for simplified structural representations
of proteins such as elastic network models[14–
17], atomistic protein structures[18, 19], or structural
ensembles[20]. Alternatively, fluctuations around an average
structure observed in a dynamic simulation can be
used to extract quasi-harmonic normal modes[21, 22].
However, the implied harmonic or quasi-harmonic approximations
are invalid for low-frequency vibrations,
which are: 1) easily excited by thermal collisions; 2) not
limited to fluctuations around a single potential energy

Currently, enhanced sampling methods can be broadly
categorized into two main types: unbiased and biased approaches.
Unbiased methods, such as Gaussian accelerated
molecular dynamics [1] and replica exchange molecular
dynamics [2], explore conformational space without
predefined collective variables (CVs, also referred to as
reaction coordinates) that describe the slow conformational
transitions of a system. Biased methods, such as
umbrella sampling [3] or metadynamics [4], rely on predefined
CVs to guide sampling. The same applies to
weighted ensemble methods [5], which do not modify dynamic
forces but accelerate sampling along CVs through
duplication and merging of unbiased walkers.

minimum; 3) distorted by anharmonic effects, i.e., the
actual form of the potential.

However, the selection of suitable CVs is non-trivial
and requires prior knowledge of the expected slow processes
to be sampled. If such information is not available,
long unbiased simulation trajectories are often used to extract
large amplitude motions or slow dynamics despite
incomplete sampling. For example, CVs associated with
large amplitude motions can be extracted as eigenvectors
of a co-variance matrix of fluctuations relative to an

To enable a correct characterization of low-frequency
vibrations, we recently introduced FREquency-SElective

ANharmonic (FRESEAN) mode analysis, which isolates
low-frequency vibrations from MD simulation trajectories
without the need for harmonic or quasi-harmonic
approximations. FRESEAN mode analysis is based on a
velocity time correlation approach that isolates degrees of
freedom (DoF) contributing to the vibrational density of
states (VDoS) at a given frequency. The sampling of velocity
time correlation functions converges on a picosec-

∗ mheyden1@asu.edu
2

ond to nanosecond timescale and is highly reproducible
in independent trajectories [23].

II. METHODS

A. Simulation Protocol

In previous work, we successfully demonstrated enhanced
sampling of conformational dynamics using lowfrequency
anharmonic vibrations as CVs that were identified
with FRESEAN mode analysis [24]. The test sysAll
simulations were performed using the GROMACS
2022.5 [26] software package. In this study, HEWL
(PDBID: 1HEL), a globular enzyme with previously
studied dynamics ([27, 28]), was selected to compare the
results of FRESEAN mode analysis at different levels

tem in Ref. 24 has been alanine dipeptide with N=22
atoms. FRESEAN mode analysis involves the calculation
of time- and frequency-dependent velocity crosscorrelations
between all Cartesian DoF of the target

of coarse-graining. With 1960 atoms, HEWL is a protein
with intrinsic collective dynamics that is still small

molecule. For alanine dipeptide with 3N = 66 Cartesian
DoF, this results in 66 × 66 = 4, 356 matrix elements for
each delay time in the correlation function and/or each
sampled frequency. Obviously, for larger biomolecular
systems, such as proteins and protein complexes with
thousands or more atoms, the size of these matrices increases
rapidly.

enough to perform FRESEAN mode analysis on an allatom
level without the need of specialized hardware.

Notably, we performed all of the simulations in this
study with all-atom resolution in explicit solvent. We
then directly analyzed the all-atom trajectories and compared
results to the analysis of CG representations of the
same trajectories.

We used the AMBER99SB-ILDN force field[29] for the
protein in combination with the TIP3P water model[30].
We placed the protein in the center of a periodic
100 ˚A × 100 ˚A × 100 ˚A simulation box with 31,977
water molecules, 90 Na+ and 98 Cl− ions (150 mM salt).
Our simulation protocol consisted of the following steps:
First, we minimized the energy of the system using the
steepest descent algorithm for 1000 steps. Then, we equilibrated
the system in the isobaric–isothermal (NPT) enAnother
concern is the time resolution required to sample
the highest-frequency vibrations in the system. Even

when covalent bonds are constrained, which eliminates
fast C-H, N-H, and O-H stretch vibrations, atomic velocities
need to be sampled at approximately 10 femtosecond
intervals to avoid under-sampling. Large trajectory
files and high file I/O traffic caused by high sampling
rates can be mitigated with data streaming approaches
that enable the analysis of simulation data on the fly[25].
However, high sampling rates also increase the number
of cross-correlation matrices that need to be stored in
memory for a given maximum correlation time (typically
a few picoseconds).

semble at 300 K and 1 bar for 100 ps. During equilibration,
we used 1 fs integration timesteps, a velocity
rescaling thermostat [31] with a 1.0 ps time constant,
and a stochastic cell rescaling barostat [32] with a time
constant of 2.0 ps. This was followed by production simulations
in the NPT ensemble with a 2 fs timestep. Unless
noted otherwise, results are reported for a single production
simulation of 20 ns. Only in the context of our
statistical analysis, we further analyzed results from five

In this work, we introduce strategies to minimize
the computational overhead associated with FRESEAN
mode analysis of molecular dynamics simulations of proteins.
We focus on the lowest-frequency vibrations in
the system, which are often most relevant for applications
associated with the identification of CVs for
enhanced sampling simulations. Using hen egg white
lysozyme (HEWL) as a test system, we demonstrate that
coarse-grained (CG) representations of all-atom simulation
trajectories can retain almost all information on lowfrequency
vibrations. The main requirement is that CG

replica simulations of 1 ns, 10 ns, 20 ns length as indicated.
In production simulations, we used a Nos´e-Hoover
thermostat [33, 34] with a 1.0 ps time constant and a
Parrinello–Rahman barostat [35] with a 2.0 ps time constant.
All covalent bonds involving hydrogens were constrained
using the LINCS[36] algorithm. Short-ranged
electrostatic and Lennard-Jones interactions were treated
with a 10 ˚A real–space cutoff with energy and pressure
corrections for dispersion interactions. Long–ranged electrostatic
interactions were treated with the Particle Mesh
Ewald algorithm[37] using a 1.2 ˚A grid.

beads correspond to centers of mass (CoM) of groups of
atoms. This approach filters out high-frequency vibrations
between atoms contributing to a CG bead, while
low-frequency vibrations between beads are preserved.
Such CG representations of all-atom trajectories greatly
reduce the number of DoFs and the resulting size of correlation
matrices used in FRESEAN mode analysis. At
the same time, the absence of high-frequency vibrations
allows for the sampling of velocities at larger time intervals,
further reducing computational overhead and memory
requirements. In general, our approach enables highthroughput
analysis of anharmonic low-frequency vibrations
in proteins and other biomolecules at minimal computational
cost.

B. FRESEAN Mode Analysis

The theory and computational steps associated with
FRESEAN mode analysis are described in Ref. 38 and
are briefly summarized here. The approach is agnostic

to the representation of the system, e.g., whether atomic
velocities are analyzed or velocities of CG beads. As a
first step in the analysis, we align the protein coordinates
in every frame of the trajectory with an arbitrary
3

reference structure using a combined translation and rotation
operation on atomic coordinates that minimizes
the root mean squared displacement (RMSD) relative to
the reference. The same rotation is applied to the protein
velocities, which ensures that the following analysis
of velocity correlations is performed in a consistent
Cartesian frame of reference. Notably, this rotation does
not remove angular momenta. To simplify the notation
for mass-weighted velocity correlation functions, we introduce
weighted velocities: ˜vi(t) = √mi
· v(t). Here,
the index i denotes one out of 3N Cartesian DoFs of the
protein and mi describes the corresponding mass (atom
or bead). We then define a matrix C˜v(τ ) of velocity time
correlation functions between all 3N DoFs that includes
auto (i = j) and cross (i ̸= j) correlations. Individual
matrix elements C˜v,ij are defined as:

This relation defines the meaning of the eigenvalues λi
:
they are directly proportional to VDoS contributions
of mass-weighted velocity fluctuations along their corresponding
eigenvector qi at frequency ωsel. When applied
to molecular systems, the vast majority of eigenvalues
λi are zero or close to zero for any given frequency.
The eigenvectors associated with the non-zero eigenvalues
at ωsel provide a complete set of vibrational modes
contributing to the VDoS at that frequency [38]. Importantly,
this approach does not rely on harmonic or quasiharmonic
approximations and can be applied to the lowest
vibrational frequencies including zero frequency. At
zero frequency, the first six eigenvectors (largest eigenvalues)
describe rigid-body translations and rotations (diffusion).
The remaining eigenvectors with non-zero eigenvalues
describe low-frequency vibrations that contribute
to the zero-frequency VDoS due to damping and/or anharmonicity
[38]. The frequency-dependent contributions
of any given vibrational mode to the VDoS can
be analyzed as described in the next section.

C˜v,ij (τ ) = ⟨˜vi(t)˜vj (t + τ )⟩t (1)

Here, ⟨...⟩
t
denotes ensemble averaging over the simulation
time and τ is the delay time between two simulation
time frames. Each time correlation function C˜v,ij (τ ) is
calculated with a maximum delay time of τmax = 2 ps in
steps ranging of 8 to 40 fs (see section II D).
After constructing C˜v(τ ), each element is Fourier
transformed to obtain a frequency-dependent velocity
correlation matrix C˜v(ω):

C. VDoS Contributions of Individual Vibrational
Modes

To quantify contributions of a single vibrational mode
qi
, e.g., one of the eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at a given
frequency ωsel, to the overall VDoS, we first project
weighted velocities (˜v(t)) of all 3N degrees of freedom
onto qi
.

C˜v,ij (ω) = Z +∞
−∞

exp(i ωτ )C˜v,ij (τ ) dτ (2)

The sum of diagonal terms of C˜v(ω) describes the sum
of all Fourier transformed time auto-correlation functions
and is directly proportional to the vibrational density of
states (VDoS) [39–41].

q˙i(t) = X
j

˜vj (t) qij (6)

VDoS(ω) = 2
kBT
X
i

C˜v,ii(ω) (3)

The projected velocities ˙qi(t) describe the system’s dynamics
along qi
. The Fourier transform of the corresponding
time auto-correlation function describes contributions
of fluctuations along qi to the VDoS at all sampled
frequencies, i.e., the VDoS for the single (collective)
DoF corresponding to qi
.

The VDoS effectively describes the distribution of kinetic
energy over vibrational frequencies (including zero
frequency). In equilibrium, normalization by the average
kinetic energy per DoF (kBT /2) in Eq. 3 ensures that
the integral over all frequencies corresponds to the total
number of protein DoFs.

Cqi

(τ ) = ⟨˙qi(t)˙qi(t + τ )⟩t (7)

NDoF =
1
2π
Z +∞
0

(ω) = 2
kBT
Z +∞
−∞

VDoS(ω) dω (4)

VDoSqi

exp(i ωτ )Cqi

(τ ) dτ (8)

For an all-atom representation of the protein with N
atoms and NH constrained covalent bonds involving hydrogen
atoms, we obtain NDoF = 3N − NH.

We note that this information is also encoded in
C˜v(ω). As a consequence, we can alternatively compute
VDoSqi
(ω) directly as:

The frequency-dependent correlation matrix C˜v(ω)
can be diagonalized at any selected frequency ωsel. The
sum of diagonal elements (trace) of C˜v(ω) does not
change upon diagonalization, which results in a simple
relation between the sum of eigenvalues λi = λi(ωsel)
and the VDoS:

(ω) = 2
kBT
q
T
i C˜v(ω)qi (9)

VDoSqi

VDoS(ωsel) = 2
kBT
X
i

Notably, if qi
is the i’th eigenvector of C˜v(ω) at frequency
ωsel then VDoSqi
(ωsel) = 2
kBT
λi(ωsel).

λi(ωsel) (5)
4

D. CG Representations of All-Atom Trajectories

E. Computational Costs and Memory
Requirements

We used three distinct CG representations of all-atom
HEWL trajectories to evaluate how much information
on low-frequency vibrations is preserved upon decreasing
the number of DoFs. In the first representation (twobead,
see Figure 1), the CoM positions and velocities of
backbone and side chain atoms of each amino acid residue
are mapped to separate beads (two beads per residue).
Glycine is an exception to this rule for which the CoM of
all residue atoms is mapped to a single bead. Atoms for
the N- and C-termini are included in the mapping to the
backbone beads of the first and last residue, respectively.
For HEWL, this representation reduces the number of
particles from 1960 atoms to 246 beads.

Both the computational overhead and memory requirements
decrease substantially upon reducing the number
of particles N and the time resolution. The construction
of C˜v(ω) requires the calculation of O(3N)
2
time correlation
functions and their Fourier transforms. In its current
implementation [42, 43], the calculation of the time
correlation functions utilizes fast Fourier transforms of
full-length time-dependent velocity trajectories (tsim =
total simulation time) and a variation of the convolution
theorem:

vi(ω) = Z tsim
0

exp(i ωt)vi(t) dt (10)

C˜v,ij (ω) = vi(ω)vj (ω) (11)

In the second CG representation (one-bead), the CoM
of all atoms of a residue is mapped to a single bead (Figure
1), and the third representation uses a single bead
corresponding to the Cαatom of each amino acid residue.
Both representations reduce the number of particles further
to 129.

Here, vj (ω) indicates the complex conjugate. The frequency
resolution is then adjusted a posteriori via a convolution
with a square window function in the time domain
that is non-zero between t = 0 and τmax.

While this approach requires storing trajectories of
all particle velocities in memory, the dominant memory
requirement for large numbers of particles N typically
results from storing the (3N)
2
correlation functions.
Further, simulation trajectories can be easily analyzed
in shorther fragments and resulting correlation matrices
C˜v(ω) can be averaged afterwards.

The key advantage of the approach in Eq. 11, for large
or small numbers of particles alike, is that the computational
cost of calculating each correlation function is
reduced from O(nt × nτ ) to O(nt log nt) (with time resolution
∆t; nτ = τmax/∆t; and nt = tsim/∆t).

For large number of particles or if many frequencies are
being analyzed, the computational cost of calculating the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) is also worth considering,
which scales with O(3N)
3 and thus decreases
dramatically upon coarse-graining.

FIG. 1. Coarse-graining schemes A: Mapping of the centerof-mass
of backbone and side-chain atoms of tyrosine (left)
into separate CG beads (middle) or a single bead (right). B:
Visualization of all-atom and CG representations of HEWL
with 1960 atoms, 246 beads, 129 beads, respectively.

F. Comparing Vibrational Modes in Distinct
Representations

In addition to reducing the number of particles and
DoF, we further tested distinct time resolutions for the
calculation of the correlation functions. A time resolution
of ∆t =8 fs allows sampling frequencies of up
to 2085 cm−1
, which, in a simulation with constraints
applied to covalent bonds involving hydrogens, includes
the fastest vibrations expected in the system. With increasing
degrees of coarse-graining, especially when using
centers-of-mass to define the mapping to CG beads, we
further eliminate high-frequency vibrations. This allows
us to further decrease the time resolution without undersampling
fluctuations, which would otherwise cause aliasing
during Fourier analysis. Specifically, we tested reduced
time resolutions of 20 fs and 40 fs.

FRESEAN mode analysis can be applied to timedependent
trajectories of particle velocities irrespective
of whether all-atom or CG representations are used.
However, the number of DoF dictates the dimensionality
of eigenvectors computed from C˜v(ω) (i.e., their number
of components). If two sets of eigenvectors contain
the same number of components (e.g., eigenvectors obtained
from the same trajectory but for different frequencies,
or eigenvectors at the same frequency obtained from
distinct trajectories), we can compare them using their
(unsigned) dot product. Since the eigenvectors are normalized,
the dot product can be interpreted as the cosine
of the angle between both vectors (or its equivalent in a
high-dimensional space).
5

Notably, we obtain a very different VDoS for the Cα
atoms of the protein. The Cα atoms participate in intramolecular
bond vibrations, which contribute to the
spectrum throughout the entire frequency range. Therefore,
Cα atom-based CG representations are not well
suited to isolate collective low-frequency vibrations in the
protein.

cos(θij ) = |qi

· qj | (12)

When cos(θij ) = 1, the eigenvectors are identical, while
cos(θij ) = 0 indicates that two vectors are orthogonal
and share no information (e.g., distinct eigenvectors computed
from the same matrix).

In Figure 2B, we zoom in on the VDoS at frequencies
below 500 cm−1 and highlight the region below 6 THz
(≈ 200 cm−1
; 1 THz ≈ 33 cm−1
), where the thermal energy
(at 300 K) exceeds harmonic oscillator excitation energies
and prominent anharmonic effects can be expected.
The comparison of the VDoS obtained for the different
CG representations clearly illustrates the frequencydependent
information loss in each of them. Most notably,
the two-bead and one-bead representations trace
the all-atom VDoS for the lowest frequencies up to several
tens of cm−1
. Due to the higher spatial resolution, the
two-bead representation reproduces the all-atom VDoS
slightly better than the one-bead representation. However,
at zero frequency both the two-bead and one-bead
representations reproduce the all-atom VDoS accurately
(in contrast to the Cα representation).

However, when comparing results from all-atom and
CG representations, we need to compare eigenvectors
with distinct dimensionality. For this comparison, for
which we only consider the two-bead and one-bead representations
of residues, we translate all-atom eigenvectors
into a CG representation that converts atomic displacements
into the corresponding CoM-displacements.
Thus, if q
aa
ik is the k’th atomic displacement vector of
the i’th all-atom eigenvector q
aa
i
, then the displacement
vector of the j’th bead in the corresponding CG representation
of that eigenvector is given by:

k∈beadj mk q
aa
ik
P
k∈beadj mk

P

cg
ij =

q

(13)

This is further highlighted in Figure 2C, where we plot
the ratio of the VDoS obtained from the CG and all-atom
representations. At zero frequency, the two-bead representation
captures 88% of the all-atom VDoS, which
drops to 78% and 65% for 1 and 2 THz, respectively.
The one-bead representation captures around 80% of the
zero-frequency VDoS intensity, which decreases with increasing
frequency analogously to the two-bead representation.
In contrast, the Cα representation captures only
≈ 10% of the all-atom VDoS at zero-frequency.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Frequency-Dependent Information in CG
Representations

In Figure 2, we compare the VDoS of HEWL obtained
from all-atom, two-bead, one-bead, and Cα-atom representations
of the all-atom simulation trajectories. All
trajectories were analyzed with a time resolution of 8 fs.
As shown in Eq. 4, the integral of the VDoS over all frequencies
corresponds to the total number of DoF, which
is inherently different for each representation: the allatom
system has 4921 DoF (3 DoF for each of the 1960
atoms minus 959 constrained bonds), while the CG representations
retain only 738 DoF (two-bead) and 387 DoF
(one-bead or Cα), respectively.

The results show that both the two-bead and one-bead
representations reproduce a substantial fraction of collective
protein vibrations for the lowest frequencies. Nevertheless,
the fraction of retained information drops rapidly
with increasing frequency. If one is interested in protein
vibrations at frequencies beyond 1-2 THz, the all-atom
representation is essential, e.g., to capture low-frequency
vibrations associated with dihedral angle rotations, etc.
However, our previous work on the extraction of CV candidates
for enhanced sampling simulations focused entirely
on vibrations contributing to the VDoS at zero
frequency [23, 24], for which the two-bead and one-bead
representations appear promising. In the following, we
will thus quantify how much coarse-graining affects the
characterization of these vibrations.

The all-atom VDoS exhibits a peak in the far-IR region
(50-80 cm−1
), consistent with previous inelastic neutron
scattering and molecular dynamics results [44]. This
peak occurs at a frequency similar to intermolecular vibrations
in the hydrogen bond network of the surrounding
hydration shell [45]. In the fingerprint and mid-IR
regions, intramolecular bond vibrations between heavy
(non-hydrogen) atoms of the protein are observed. However,
resonances beyond 2000 cm−1 are absent due to
constrained bonds involving hydrogen atoms.

Reproducing a large fraction of the all-atom VDoS at
zero frequency does not yet prove that the corresponding
CG vibrations faithfully reproduce the corresponding
collective all-atom vibrations. A significant fraction
of the zero-frequency VDoS is associated with rigid-body
translations/rotations and of limited interest in the context
of vibrations. In addition, reproducing the magnitude
of fluctuations does not necessarily imply that the
underlying motions are identical. Thus, in the following
section, we directly compare the eigenvectors obtained

For the two-bead and one-bead representations, vibrations
are almost entirely restricted to frequencies below
500 cm−1
. The center-of-mass representations largely
eliminate vibrations between individual atoms. In contrast,
vibrations between separate beads, which correspond
to collective vibrations in the protein, are retained
and observed at low frequencies.
6

FIG. 2. (A) Vibrational density of states (VDoS) of HEWL in the all-atom (red), two-bead (blue), one-bead (green), and
Cα (magenta) representations for all frequencies sampled in the simulation. The boxed region highlights the frequency range
below 500 cm−1
shown as a close-up in (B). A gray background in (B,C) highlights the 0–6 THz range, where the thermal

energy exceeds harmonic oscillator excitation energies (kBT ≥ hν). (C) Fraction of the all-atom VDoS captured by the CG
representations as a function of frequency.

for all-atom and CG representations of our simulations
using FRESEAN mode analysis. These eigenvectors describe
collective motion in terms of displacement vectors
relative to the reference structure used during the translational/rotational
alignment of the trajectories.

selected frequency. When eigenvalues become close or

equal to zero, their eigenvectors are degenerate, i.e., any
linear combination of these eigenvectors describes a collective
DoF with no contributions to the VDoS at the selected
frequency. Thus, with increasing index, we expect
eigenvectors to become increasingly randomized. Nevertheless,
the high similarity between all-atom and CG
eigenvectors in the two-bead representation extends beyond
index 25. Notably, our results for the one-bead representation
in Figure S2 of the SI are remarkably similar.
This shows that the zero-frequency VDoS is dominated
by collective motions in which all atoms within a given
residue move together.

B. Eigenvector Comparison

In Figure 3, we show comparisons between eigenvectors
of the velocity correlation matrices C˜v(ω) obtained from
all-atom and two-bead CG representations at zero frequency,
1 THz, and 2 THz. An analogous comparison for
the one-bead representation is shown in Figure S1 in the
Supplementary Information (SI). Comparisons are visualized
as matrices of cosine similarities between eigenvectors
obtained from trajectories in both representations.
The eigenvectors are sorted by descending eigenvalues,
i.e., the eigenvector with index 1 corresponds to the

However, eigenvector similarities decrease substantially
for non-zero frequencies as shown in Figure 3B and
C. While frequencies of 1 and 2 THz are still deep in the
far-infrared and typically also associated with collective
vibrations, the lack of atomistic detail in the two-bead
(and one-bead) representation limits cosine similarities

along the diagonal of the comparison matrices to values
around 0.5. We find different ordering for several eigenvectors,
i.e., the CG eigenvector with the highest similarity
to a given all-atom eigenvector has a different index
and is thus not found along the diagonal in the comparison
matrix. Several entries of similar magnitude in a
column of the comparison matrix further indicate that
the corresponding all-atom eigenvector is best described
by a linear combination of multiple CG eigenvectors.

largest eigenvalue of the matrix C˜v(ωsel). To compare
vectors of distinct dimensionality, we used the approach
described in Eq. 13.

The comparison in Figure 3A shows clearly that zerofrequency
eigenvectors are essentially equivalent in the
all-atom and two-bead representations. The cosine similarities
of eigenvectors along the diagonal (eigenvectors
with the same index) are on average 0.98. This observation
is independent of whether we compare eigenvectors
1-6, which describe rigid-body translations and
rotations (see Figure S2 of the SI for visualization), or
higher-index modes that correspond to vibrations. We
specifically highlight eigenvectors 7, 8, and 9 at zero frequency,
which describe vibrational modes contributing to
the zero-frequency VDoS. In previous work, we identified
these orthogonal vibrational modes as CV candidates for
enhanced sampling simulations [23, 24].

C. VDoS of Eigenvector Projections

In Figure 4, we analyze the spectrum of velocity fluctuations
projected on the first 10 eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at
zero frequency, 1 THz and 2 THz for all-atom and twobead
CG (two-bead) representations of our simulation
trajectories (see Figure S4 of the SI for an analogous analysis
with the one-bead representation). The displayed
spectra represent VDoS contributions from fluctuations

In FRESEAN mode analysis, increasing mode indices
(decreasing eigenvalues; see Figure S3 of the SI) correspond
to decreasing contributions to the VDoS at the
7

FIG. 3. Cosine similarity matrices between the first 25 eigenvectors of the velocity correlation matrix C˜v(ω) at zero frequency
(A), 1 THz (B), and 2 THz (C). Each matrix compares eigenvectors sampled from 20 ns simulations. A cosine similarity of 1
indicates identical eigenvectors, while a value of 0 indicates orthogonal eigenvectors. At zero frequency, we highlight eigenvectors
describing rigid-body translations and rotations (eigenvectors 1-6, gray box) and vibrations with large contributions to the zero
frequency VDoS (eigenvectors 7, 8, and 9, red box), which we identified as potential CV candidates for enhanced conformational
sampling in previous work [23]. Average cosine similarities along the diagonal within each box are indicate as numerical values.

to 10 cm−1
. The spectra also show why these vibrational
modes were isolated by our analysis: the broad
lineshape of the peaks result in significant VDoS contributions
at zero frequency (and thus non-zero eigenvalues
of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency). The broad lineshape can be
attributed to the anharmonicity of the anharmonic poalong
individual collective degrees of freedom, as defined
by their respective eigenvectors (1D-VDoS, see Eq. 8).

tential and/or damping, e.g., due to energy dissipation
into the solvent.

The most critical observation in the context of our
analysis is that fluctuations along zero-frequency eigenvectors
result in essentially identical 1D-VDoS for allatom
and CG representations (the same is true for the
one-bead representation as shown in Figure S4 of the SI).
This confirms that the two-bead and one-bead representations
of all-atom protein simulations preserve information
on the lowest-frequency vibrations.

As already seen in panels B and C of Figure 3, this is
not the case for eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at frequencies ≥
1 THz. In the central and right panels of Figure 4, we
plotted the 1D-VDoS for fluctuations along the first 10
eigenvectors obtained at 1 and 2 THz. Since we already
observed in Figure 3 that the eigenvectors in the all-atom
and CG representations are not equivalent, it is not surprising
that spectra of fluctuations along the eigenvectors
are not identical either.

FIG. 4. 1D-VDoS from fluctuations along the first 10 eigenvectors
of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency, 1 THz and 2 THz obtained
for all-atom (red) and two-bead (blue) representations of protein
trajectories. Colored labels indicate peak frequencies in
each spectrum and vertical dashed lines indicate the frequency
for which C˜v(ω) was evaluated.

The eigenvectors are selected by our analysis for their
VDoS contributions at 1 and 2 THz. Consequently, we
observe peak intensities close to both frequencies irrespective
of the trajectory representation. However, we
observe minor differences in peak frequencies and increased
peak intensities for fluctuations along eigenvectors
obtained from the all-atom representation. The integral
of each VDoS describes the kinetic energy of a
single DoF (see Eq. 4). The increased peak intensities
in the all-atom 1D-VDoS thus correspond to a narrower

As mentioned earlier, the first six eigenvectors at zero
frequency (left panel) describe rigid-body translations

and rotations. The 1D-VDoS for these diffusive motions
feature a maximum at zero frequency that is directly
proportional to the corresponding translational
and rotational diffusion coefficients [46]. The 1D-VDoS
for zero-frequency eigenvectors 7-10 describe collective
low-frequency vibrations of the protein with peaks close
8

spectrum that is broadened by the CG representation.

The CG eigenvectors at 1 and 2 THz likely still contain
valid general information on far-infrared protein vibrations.
However, in contrast to zero-frequency CG eigenvectors,
which reproduce all-atom motions essentially exactly,
the information loss for 1 and 2 THz vibrations due
to coarse-graining is non-negligible.

As mentioned earlier, we identified zero-frequency
eigenvectors associated with lowest-frequency vibrations
as CV candidates for enhanced sampling in previous
work [23, 24]. For such applications, both the two-bead
and one-bread CG representations are ideal as they preserve
all necessary information at a fraction of the computational
cost and memory requirements.

D. Reducing Time Resolution

In Figure 5A, we compare zero frequency eigenvectors
obtained from the two-bead representation of our trajectories
with time resolutions of 8 fs, 20 fs, and 40 fs,
while we compare the corresponding total VDoS in Figure
5B. The highest frequencies sampled at each of these
time resolutions correspond to 2085 cm−1
, 834 cm−1
, and
417 cm−1
, respectively (Nyquist’s theorem). A comparFIG.
5. (A) Cosine similarity matrices between the first 25
eigenvectors of the velocity correlation matrix C˜v(ω) obtained
with the two-bead representation at time resolutions of 8 fs
and 20 fs (left) and 8 fs and 40 fs (right). (B) VDoS obtained
for the two-bead representation of trajectories with time resolutions
of dτ = 8 (red), 20 (blue), and 40 fs (green).

ison to the VDoS of the two-bead representation in Figure
2 shows that a 20 fs time resolution only cuts off
minor signals beyond 800 cm−1
. It is thus not surprising
that a reduced time resolution of 20 fs has no effect on
the eigenvectors of C˜v(0) and the total VDoS.

However, a time resolution of 40 fs under-samples vibrations
around 400 cm−1
that contribute to a highfrequency
shoulder of the main VDoS peak. Consequently,
we observe small but detectable discrepancies
to the all-atom simulation for eigenvectors with index 15
and beyond. Under-sampling high frequency vibrations
results in false signals at low frequencies (aliasing), which
we observe in the form of increased zero-frequency VDoS
in Figure 5B. At the same time, VDoS intensities for
frequencies >25 cm−1 are diminished due to a shift to
higher frequencies.

addition to coarse-graining.

E. Visualization of Low-Frequency Vibrations

In Figure 6, we visualized eigenvectors 7 and 8 of C˜v(ω)
at zero frequency in their all-atom and two-bead representations.
We visualized the atomic and CG-bead displacements
corresponding to the collective vibration as
bi-directional arrows (positive and negative phase of the
vibration) that are superimposed on the reference structure
used for translational/rotational alignment of the
trajectories. As shown in Figure 4, fluctuations along
both eigenvectors contribute a low-frequency peak to the
VDoS with a peak frequency of 10.4 cm−1
. Visual inspection
confirms the high level of similarity of collective
motions described on the all-atom and CG level. The
two vibrations correspond to distinct large-scale deformations
that can be compared to similar motions observed
using harmonic normal modes ([28], [47]). However, the
differences between harmonic normal modes and the vibrational
modes identified via FRESEAN mode analysis
matter: as shown in previous work on the Trp-cage protein
[38], harmonic and quasi-harmonic normal modes
fail to identify collective DoF that isolate low-frequency
vibrations, while the 1D-VDoS in Figure 4 each exhibit
only a single low-frequency peak.

Here, the one-bead representation should be more forgiving.
As shown in Figure 2, the VDoS obtained from
the one-bead representation has only minor contributions
beyond 400 cm−1
. As shown in Figure S5 of the SI, the
zero-frequency VDoS for a time resolution of 40 fs is now
essentially identical to the results for time resolutions of
8 fs and 20 fs. However, the eigenvectors and VDoS beyond
25 ˜wn show similar deviations between time resolutions
of 8 fs and 40 fs time resolutions as observed for the
two-bead model. Overall, the one-bead representation is
only slightly less sensitive to the time resolution of the
trajectory compared to the two-bead model.

In both cases, a lower time resolution decreases the
number of correlation time and frequency points that
must be stored for each matrix element of C˜v(τ ) and
C˜v(ω). This further reduces computational cost and
memory requirements for FRESEAN mode analysis in
9

in Figure 7. Instead of an all-to-all comparison, we compare
eigenvectors obtained from replicas 1-5 with replica
1 to simplify the visualization. We include the trivial
comparison of replica 1 with itself for clarity.

In Figure 7A, we show the results for 1 ns simulations,
which demonstrate substantial statistical variations.
While general correlations exist between eigenvectors
obtained from distinct simulations along the diagonal,
the cosine similarity mostly remains below 0.6. We
occasionally observe higher correlations off-diagonal, in
particular for the first 6 eigenvectors that describe rigidbody
translation and rotation. The latter indicates similar
eigenvectors but a distinct ordering of the corresponding
eigenvalues. However, we focus our attention primarily
on eigenvectors 7-9 that describe the lowest-frequency
vibrations of the protein. Here, the average correlation
between eigenvector pairs with identical indices ranges
only from 0.27 to 0.35, indicating substantial variations
between replicas.

FIG. 6. Visualization of eigenvectors 7 and 8 of C˜v(ω) at
zero frequency obtained from all-atom and two-bead representations
of our simulation trajectories. Displacement vectors
are shown as bi-directional arrows that are superimposed on a
reference structure. Orange (yellow) arrows describe the positive
(negative) phase of an oscillation. The reference structure
is shown in a cartoon representation to highlight secondary

structure elements. The α-domain is shown in gray and the
β-domain is highlighted in red.

For 10 ns simulation in Figure 7B, the reproducibility
improves significantly. We still observe distinct ordering
of eigenvectors describing translations and rotations.
However, especially eigenvector 7, which describes the
lowest frequency vibration of the protein, is reproduced
with high confidence. Compared to replica 1, cosine similarities
are mostly greater than 0.8 with the sole exception
of replica 5, where it is about 0.7. More variability is
observed for eigenvectors 8 and 9, which are either mixed
(large diagonal and off-diagonal entries in the comparison
matrix for replica 2), observed in a different order (replica
3), or not accurately reproduced at all (replica 5). Only
for one case (replica 4), we observe essentially the same
eigenvectors as in replica 1 with cosine similarities on the
order of 0.9.

Eigenvector 7 indicates a concerted opening/closing
motion of the β-domain (residues 40-88; shown in red)
against the α-domain (residues 1-39 and 89-129; shown
in gray) [48], which can alternatively be described by the
pincer angle between both domains[28]. Eigenvector 8 indicates
an orthogonal motion, where both β-domain and
α-domains twist in opposite directions around a shared
axis (parallel to direction of view in Figure 6B). We successfully
employed both eigenvectors in previous work as

CVs for enhanced sampling simulations of HEWL conformations
[23].

Increasing the length of simulation trajectories by a
factor of two to 20 ns results in highly reproducible lowfrequency
vibrations. While the order of eigenvectors
describing translations and rotations still varies between
distinct replicas, the lowest frequency vibrations are uniformly
reproduced with correct ordering and correlations
of 0.8 and higher (0.88 on average). Even eigenvectors
with higher indices, which are expected to be increasingly
influenced by noise as discussed earlier, are reproduced
with high fidelity. A single exception are eigenvectors 11

F. Statistical Reproducibility

In addition to coarse-graining of all-atom trajectories
and selecting the time resolution, another factor that
determines the computational cost of FRESEAN mode
analysis is the length of the simulation time required to
obtain converged results.

To determine the optimal length of simulation trajectories,
we tested simulation times of 1 ns, 10 ns and 20 ns
and repeated the simulation protocol described in section
II A five times with starting velocities sampled independently
from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution at
300 K. We aim to determine the simulation time needed
to obtain reproducible eigenvectors from the correlation
matrix C˜v(ω) at zero frequency in simulations starting
from a given starting structure (here: crystal structure
with PDBID: 1HEL). For this analysis, we used the twobead
representation of all-atom trajectories with a time
resolution of 20 fs (see Figure S6 in the SI for analogous
analysis with the one-bead model).

and 12 in replica 3 whose order is swapped compared to
replica 1.

Our results demonstrate that 20 ns simulations are
sufficient to obtain reliable information on the lowestfrequency
vibrations of HEWL. The latter can be explained
by the rapid convergence of velocity time correlation
functions, which typically decay to zero on
timescales of 1-2 ps. Thus, simulation trajectories of
20 ns length contain between 10,000 and 20,000 independent
samples. The latter is not the case for methods

To quantify reproducibility, we again use cosine similarity
matrices to compare eigenvectors generated in five
replica simulations for each trajectory length as shown

reliant on correlated displacements, i.e., coordinate fluctuations,
which typically feature much longer correlation
times and thus suffer from reduced statistics.
10

FIG. 7. Reproducibility of eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency obtained from a two-bead representation of five replica
all-atom simulations trajectories of 1 ns (A), 10 ns (B), and 20 ns (C) length. All simulations are compared to replica 1

for clarity and shown are matrices of cosine similiarities between pairs of the first 25 eigenvectors. Eigenvectors describing
rigid-body translations and rotations (1-6) and the lowest frequency vibrations (7-9) are highlighted as in Figures 3 and 5.

IV. CONCLUSION

frequency.

Thus, the simulated dynamics of the molecular system
determines how many vibrational modes contribute
to the spectrum at any given frequency. Spectral lineshapes,
damping, and the influence of the molecular environment
are explicitly taken into account and can be
analyzed via projections of the simulated dynamics onto
isolated vibrational coordinates. Notably, the lowest frequency
vibrations of large biomolecules such as proteins
can provide hints on intrinsic collective degrees of freedom
associated with conformational transitions, which
can serve as effective CVs in enhanced sampling simulations.The
analysis of molecular vibrations at low frequencies
has long been limited by harmonic approximations,
which are either used explicitly (harmonic normal mode

analysis) or implicitly, i.e., whenever a one-to-one mapping
between DOFs and vibrational modes is assumed.
Harmonic approximations can provide a sound basis for
the description of molecular vibrations at high frequencies,
where quantum oscillators primarily populate their
vibrational ground state and even classical oscillators are
restricted to the immediate vicinity of a potential energy
minimum. However, at low frequencies, where the thermal
energy significantly exceeds the harmonic oscillator

However, the calculation of the velocity time cross correlation
matrix, which is central to FRESEAN mode
analysis, can be problematic for all degrees of freedom
of a large system. To sample all vibrational frequencies
and avoid aliasing in the frequency domain, trajectory
information needs to be stored (or processed on-the-fly,
e.g., via trajectory streaming [25]) at a high time resolution.
More importantly, the dimensions of the correlation
matrix, whose elements consist of arrays of time correlations,
can become prohibitive for large systems.

excitation energy (kBT > hν), harmonic approximations
become increasingly invalid. FRESEAN mode analysis
[38] provides a novel perspective on low-frequency vibrations
in molecules, which does not rely on harmonic
approximations. Instead of mapping all degrees of freedom
to a single set of orthogonal vibrational coordinates,
dynamic fluctuations in a simulation trajectory are analyzed
as a function of frequency. As a result, orthogonal
sets of collective vibrational coordinates are generated
for each sampled frequency and sorted by their contributions
(kinetic energy) to the vibrational spectrum at that

However, for many applications, such as the generation
of CV candidates for enhanced sampling simulations,
11

only collective vibrations at the lowest frequencies are of

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

primary importance. Thus, we analyzed here the persistence
of information on such low-frequency vibrations

This work is supported by the National Science Foundation
(CHE-2154834) and the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences (R01GM148622). The authors acknowledge
Research Computing at Arizona State University
for providing high performance computing resources
that have contributed to the research results reported
within this work.

in distinct CG schemes applied a posteriori to all-atom
simulation trajectories prior to analysis. We find that

CG schemes that map individual atoms of amino acids
residues to beads describing their center-of-mass motion
(one or two beads per residue), successfully capture essentially
all information on collective frequency vibrations
that give rise to the eigenvectors of the velocity
correlation matrix at zero frequency. Likewise, such CG
representations serve as a natural low-pass frequency filters,
which reduce the time resolution needed to prevent
aliasing during Fourier analysis.

In addition, we analyzed the length of simulation trajectories
needed to obtain highly reproducible results.
The latter may be system-dependent but we expect our
results to be applicable to proteins of similar size as
HEWL. Our optimal simulation protocol utilizes either
a two-bead or one-bead (per residue) CG representation
of the protein with a time resolution of 20 fs or 40 fs,
respectively, and simulation trajectories of 20 ns length.

In Table I, we show the relative computational costs
(floating point operations = flops) and memory requirements
associated with FRESEAN mode analysis of a
20 ns trajectory of HEWL (1960 atoms) for distinct representations.
For each representation, we use a time resolution
of the trajectory that minimizes aliasing: 8 fs
for all-atom, 20 fs for the two-bead representation (246
beads total), and 40 fs for the one-bead representation
(129 beads total). Here, we assume that the elements of
the time correlation matrix are computed from a single
trajectory using the approach described in Eq. 11.

all-atom two-bead one-bead
store trajectory (memory) 100% 12.5% 6.6%

compute C˜v(ω) (flops) 100% 0.59% 0.08%
store C˜v(ω) (memory) 100% 0.63% 0.09%

diagonalize C˜v(0) (flops) 100% 0.02% 0.003%

TABLE I. Comparison of computational cost and memory requirements
associated with distinct steps of FRESEAN mode
analysis for 20 ns simulation of HEWL in distinct representations.
The number of particles are 1960 (all-atom), 246
(two-bead), and 129 (one-bead). The time resolution of the
trajectories for the distinct representations are 8 fs (all-atom),
20 fs (two-bead), and 40 fs (one-bead).

Table I clearly illustrates how dramatically computational
costs and memory requirements decrease when
the analysis is performed for CG representations of allatom
trajectories. This makes it straightforward to apply
FRESEAN mode analysis to extract the lowest-frequency
vibrations even for large proteins and protein complexes.
S1

Supporting Information: High-Throughput Computation of Anharmonic
Low-Frequency Protein Vibrations

Eigenvector Comparison for One-Bead Representation

FIG. S1. Cosine similarity matrices between the first 25 eigenvectors of the velocity correlation matrix C˜v(ω) at zero frequency
(A), 1 THz (B), and 2 THz (C). Each matrix compares eigenvectors sampled from 20 ns simulations. A cosine similarity of 1
indicates parallel eigenvectors, while a value of 0 indicates orthogonal eigenvectors. At zero frequency, we highlight eigenvectors
describing rigid-body translations and rotations (eigenvectors 1-6, gray box) and vibrations with large contributions to the zero
frequency VDoS (eigenvectors 7, 8, and 9, red box), which we identified as potential CV candidates for enhanced conformational
sampling in previous work [23]. Average cosine similarities along the diagonal within each box are indicate as numerical values.
S2

Translational and Rotational Eigenvectors

FIG. S2. Visualization of translational and rotational eigenvectors 1 - 6 of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency obtained from all-atom
trajectories. Displacement vectors are shown as bi-directional arrows that are superimposed on a reference structure. Orange
(yellow) arrows describe the positive (negative) phase of an oscillation. The reference structure is shown in a cartoon representation
to highlight secondary structure elements. The α-domain is shown in gray and the β-domain is highlighted in red.
S3
Comparing Zero-Frequency Eigenvalues of Different Representations

FIG. S3. First 100 eigenvalues at zero frequency obtained from the all-atom (red), two-bead (green), one-bead (blue), and
Cα(magenta) representations.
S4
1D-VDoS Comparison with One Bead Model

FIG. S4. 1D-VDoS from fluctuations along the first ten eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency, 1 THz, and 2 THz obtained
for all-atom (red) and one-bead (blue) representations of protein trajectories. Colored labels indicate peak frequencies in each
spectrum and vertical dashed lines indicate the frequency for which C˜v(ω) was evaluated.
S5
Reducing Correlation Function Time Resolution for One-Bead Model

FIG. S5. (A) Cosine similarity matrices between the first 25 eigenvectors of the velocity correlation matrix C˜v(ω) obtained
with the one-bead representation at time resolutions of 8 fs and 20 fs (left) and 8 fs and 40 fs (right). (B) VDoS obtained for
the one-bead representation of trajectories with time resolutions of dτ = 8 (red), 20 (blue), and 40 fs (green).
6

Evaluating Reproducibility of One-Bead modes at Different Simulation Times

FIG. S6. Reproducibility of eigenvectors of C˜v(ω) at zero frequency obtained from a one-bead representation of five replica
all-atom simulations trajectories of 1 ns (A), 10 ns (B), and 20 ns (C) length. All simulations are compared to replica 1 for
clarity and shown are matrices of cosine similarities between pairs of the first 25 eigenvectors. Eigenvectors describing rigidbody
translations and rotations (1-6) and the lowest frequency vibrations (7-9) are highlighted in gray and red, respectively.

[1] Y. Miao, V. A. Feher, and J. A. McCammon, Gaussian
accelerated molecular dynamics: Unconstrained enhanced
sampling and free energy calculation, J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 11, 3584 (2015).

[5] D. M. Zuckerman and L. T. Chong, Weighted ensemble
simulation: review of methodology, applications, and
software, Annu. Rev. Biophys. 46, 43 (2017).
[6] C. C. David and D. J. Jacobs, Principal component analysis:
a method for determining the essential dynamics of
proteins, Methods Mol Biol. 1084, 193 (2014).
[7] Y. Naritomi and S. Fuchigami, Slow dynamics of a protein
backbone in molecular dynamics simulation revealed
by time-structure based independent component analysis,
J. Chem. Phys. 139, 215102 (2013).

[2] Y. Sugita and Y. Okamoto, Replica-exchange molecular
dynamics method for protein folding, Chem. Phys. Lett.
314, 141 (1999).

[3] G. Torrie and J. Valleau, Nonphysical sampling distributions
in monte carlo free-energy estimation: Umbrella
sampling, J. Comput. Phys. 23, 187 (1977).
[4] A. Laio and M. Parrinello, Escaping free-energy minima,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 99, 12562 (2002).

[8] S. Schultze and H. Grubm¨uller, Time-lagged independent
component analysis of random walks and protein dynam-
7

ics, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 17, 5766 (2021), pMID:
34449229.

mance molecular simulations through multi-level parallelism
from laptops to supercomputers, SoftwareX 1, 19
(2015).

[9] Z. Zou, D. Wang, and P. Tiwary, A graph neural networkstate
predictive information bottleneck (gnn-spib) approach
for learning molecular thermodynamics and kinetics,
Digit. Discov. 4, 211 (2025).

[27] M. Levitt, C. Sander, and P. S. Stern, Protein normalmode
dynamics: Trypsin inhibitor, crambin, ribonuclease
and lysozyme, J. Mol. Biol. 181, 423 (1985).

[10] A. Majumder and J. E. Straub, Machine learning derived
collective variables for the study of protein homodimerization
in membrane, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 20, 5774
(2024), pMID: 38918177.

[28] M. G. S. Costa, P. R. Batista, P. M. Bisch, and D. Perahia,
Exploring free energy landscapes of large conformational
changes: molecular dynamics with excited normal
modes, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 2755 (2015).
[29] K. Lindorff-Larsen, S. Piana, K. Palmo, P. Maragakis,
J. L. Klepeis, R. O. Dror, and D. E. Shaw, Improved sidechain
torsion potentials for the amber ff99sb protein force
field, Proteins: Struct. Funct. Bioinf. 78, 1950 (2010).
[30] W.-L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrasekhar, J.-D. Madura, R.-
W. Impey, and M.-L. Klein, Comparison of simple potential
functions for simulating liquid water, J. Chem.
Phys. 79, 926 (1983).

[11] D. Mendels, G. Piccini, and M. Parrinello, Collective
variables from local fluctuations, J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
9, 2776 (2018), pMID: 29733652.

[12] H. Chen, H. Liu, H. Feng, H. Fu, W. Cai, X. Shao,
and C. Chipot, Mlcv: Bridging machine-learning-based
dimensionality reduction and free-energy calculation, J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 62, 1 (2022), pMID: 34939790.
[13] S. Chatterjee and D. Ray, Acceleration with interpretability:
A surrogate model-based collective variable
for enhanced sampling, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 21,
1561 (2025).

[31] G. Bussi, D. Donadio, and M. Parrinello, Canonical sampling
through velocity rescaling, J. Chem. Phys. 126
(2007).

[14] C. Chennubhotla, A. J. Rader, L.-W. Yang, and I. Bahar,
Elastic network models for understanding biomolecular
machinery: from enzymes to supramolecular assemblies,
Phys. Biol. 2, S173 (2005).

[32] M. Bernetti and G. Bussi, Pressure control using stochastic
cell rescaling, J. Chem. Phys. 153, 10.1063/5.0020514
(2020).

[33] S. Nos´e, A molecular dynamics method for simulations
in the canonical ensemble, Mol. Phys. 52, 255 (1984).
[34] W. G. Hoover, Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phasespace
distributions, Phys. Rev. A 31, 1695 (1985).
[35] M. Parrinello and A. Rahman, Polymorphic transitions
in single crystals: A new molecular dynamics method, J.
Appl. Phys. 52, 7182 (1981).

[15] M. M. Tirion, Large amplitude elastic motions in proteins
from a single-parameter, atomic analysis, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 77, 1905 (1996).

[16] I. Bahar, A. R. Atilgan, and B. Erman, Direct evaluation
of thermal fluctuations in proteins using a singleparameter
harmonic potential, Fold. Des. 2, 173 (1997).
[17] T. Haliloglu, I. Bahar, and B. Erman, Gaussian dynamics
of folded proteins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 3090 (1997).
[18] B. Brooks and M. Karplus, Harmonic dynamics of proteins:
normal modes and fluctuations in bovine pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 80,
6571 (1983).

[36] B. Hess, H. Bekker, H. J. Berendsen, and J. G. Fraaije,
Lincs: A linear constraint solver for molecular simulations,
J. Comput. Chem. 18, 1463 (1997).

[37] T. Darden, D. York, and L. Pedersen, Particle mesh
ewald: An n log (n) method for ewald sums in large systems,
J. Chem. Phys. 98, 10089 (1993).

[19] S. Mahajan and Y.-H. Sanejouand, On the relationship
between low-frequency normal modes and the large-scale
conformational changes of proteins, Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
567, 59 (2015).

[38] M. A. Sauer and M. Heyden, Frequency-selective anharmonic
mode analysis of thermally excited vibrations in
proteins, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 19, 5481 (2023).
[39] S. Chakraborty, S.-K. Sinha, and S. Bandyopadhyay,
Low-frequency vibrational spectrum of water in the hydration
layer of a protein: A molecular dynamics simulation
study, J. Phys. Chem. B 111, 13626 (2007).
[40] M. Heyden, J. Sun, S. Funkner, G. Mathias, H. Forbert,
M. Havenith, and D. Marx, Dissecting the THz spectrum
of liquid water from first principles via correlations in
time and space, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A 107, 12068
(2010).

[20] T. D. Romo, A. Grossfield, and A. G. Markelz, Persistent
protein motions in a rugged energy landscape revealed by
normal mode ensemble analysis, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 60,
6419 (2020).

[21] R. Levy, A. Srinivasan, W. Olson, and J. McCammon,
Quasi-harmonic method for studying very low frequency
modes in proteins, Biopolymers 23, 1099 (1984).
[22] R. M. Levy, O. De la Luz Rojas, and R. A. Friesner,
Quasi-harmonic method for calculating vibrational spectra
from classical simulations on multi-dimensional anharmonic
potential surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. 88, 4233
(1984).

[41] G. Mathias and M. D. Baer, Generalized normal coordinates
for the vibrational analysis of molecular dynamics
simulations, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 2028 (2011).
[42] M. A. Sauer, S. Mondal, and M. Heyden, FRESEANmetadynamics
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.15678841 (2025).
[43] M. Heyden, FRESEAN-tutorial DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.15686127
(2025).

[23] M. A. Sauer, S. Mondal, B. Neff, S. Maiti, and M. Heyden,
Fast sampling of protein conformational dynamics,
(2024), arXiv:2411.08154.

[24] S. Mondal, M. A. Sauer, and M. Heyden, Exploring conformational
landscapes along anharmonic low-frequency
vibrations, J. Phys. Chem. B 128, 7112 (2024).
[25] L. J. Woods, A. Thirumalaiswamy, H. Cho, O. Beckstein,
and M. Heyden, IMDClient DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.15678276
(2025).

[44] A. Lerbret, A. H´edoux, B. Annigh¨ofer, and M.-C.
Bellissent-Funel, Influence of pressure on the lowfrequency
vibrational modes of lysozyme and water: A
complementary inelastic neutron scattering and molecular
dynamics simulation study, Proteins: Struct. Funct.
Bioinf. 81, 326 (2012).

[26] M. J. Abraham, T. Murtola, R. Schulz, S. P´all, J. C.
Smith, B. Hess, and E. Lindahl, Gromacs: High perfor[45]
M. Heyden and D. J. Tobias, Spatial dependence of
protein-water collective hydrogen-bond dynamics, Phys.
8

Rev. Lett. 111, 218101 (2013).
[46] R. Zwanzig, Time-correlation functions and transport
coefficients in statistical mechanics, Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 16, 67 (1965).

Phys. Chem. B 102, 3586 (1998).
[48] M. R. Krebs, D. K. Wilkins, E. W. Chung, M. C.
Pitkeathly, A. K. Chamberlain, J. Zurdo, C. V. Robinson,
and C. M. Dobson, Formation and seeding of amyloid
fibrils from wild-type hen lysozyme and a peptide
fragment from the β-domain, J. Mol. Biol. 300, 541
(2000).

[47] A. D. MacKerell Jr, D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack
Jr, J. D. Evanseck, M. J. Field, S. Fischer, J. Gao,
H. Guo, S. Ha, et al., All-atom empirical potential for
molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins, J.