CAtCh: Cognitive Assessment through Cookie Thief

Joseph T Colonel∗

, Carolyn Hagler†

, Jacqueline Becker‡
,
Juan Wisnivesky‡
, Alex Federman‡
, Gaurav Pandey§

, Guiselle Wismer†

, Laura Curtis†

∗Windreich Department of AI and Human Health, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
‡Division of General Internal Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
§Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA
†Division of General Internal Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Abstract—Several machine learning algorithms have been developed
for the prediction of Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementia (ADRD) from spontaneous speech. However, none
of these algorithms have been translated for the prediction
of broader cognitive impairment (CI), which in some cases
is a precursor and risk factor of ADRD. In this paper, we
evaluated several speech-based open-source methods originally
proposed for the prediction of ADRD, as well as methods from
multimodal sentiment analysis for the task of predicting CI from
patient audio recordings. Results demonstrated that multimodal
methods outperformed unimodal ones for CI prediction, and that
acoustics-based approaches performed better than linguisticsbased
ones. Specifically, interpretable acoustic features relating to
affect and prosody were found to significantly outperform BERTbased
linguistic features and interpretable linguistic features,
respectively. All the code developed for this study is available
at https://github.com/JTColonel/catch.

The proliferation of vocal assistants in smartphones and smart
home devices has also brought low cost, high quality voice

recording to the market [10], greatly expanding the accessibility
of this biomarker and the feasibility of speech-based CI
screening in clinical settings.

arXiv:2506.06603v1 [cs.LG] 7 Jun 2025

Several studies that have endeavored to use speech for CI
detection have relied on recordings of patients performing the
Cookie Thief Test (CTT). The CTT is a 1-minute picture
description task used in some neuropsychiatric batteries to
assess language and communication abilities and executive
functioning in an ecologically valid approximation of spontaneous
speech [11]. Given the simplicity and brevity of the
CTT, it could serve as the basis for a standardized approach
to speech-based cognitive impairment screening in clinical
settings.

Index Terms—Cognitive impairment, multimodal machine
learning, speech processing, natural language processing

Early efforts to identify CI using CTT data have been
promising. The ADReSSo (Alzheimer’s Dementia Recognition
through Spontaneous Speech)-2021 Challenge [12] invited
participants to predict ADRD from CTT audio recordings. One
important aspect of this challenge was that participants were
required to use automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems to
transcribe the audio to text. ASR systems sidestep the need for
labor intensive manual transcriptions, and offer the potential
of scaling and automating CI screening from CTT recordings.
Another relevant field of research for audio-based clinical

I. INTRODUCTION
Current estimates indicate that 9% of all adult Americans
and 19% of those aged 65 years and older have some form
of cognitive impairment (CI) [1], [2]. Since mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) is a risk factor for dementia and because
various interventions may reduce the risk for further cognitive
decline and/or risk of harm among those with CI, identifying
patients with early stage CI may improve long-term management
and outcomes for these patients [3]. However, MCI and
early stage dementia often go undiagnosed, resulting, in part,
from low rates of routine CI screening in primary care [4],
[5].

diagnosis is multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) [13]. MSA
combines text, audio, and video modalities to predict the
sentiment of an utterance or sequence of connected utterances.
Clinical datasets such as the Distress Analysis Interview
Corpus (DAIC) collate recordings of subjects who have been
assessed for psychological conditions, such as depression, and
had interviews recorded with audio and video [14]. Similar to
ML for ADRD classification, automated approaches to psychological
assessment have expanded due to the accessibility
of the DAIC corpus as well as competitions that have been
organized using the data [15], [16].

In recent years, researchers have evaluated automated approaches
to CI detection to supplant the time consuming task
of physician-administered CI screening. A frequent focus of
this research has been speech, which is increasingly recognized
as a clinical biomarker [6]–[8] of cognitive functioning [9].

This work was supported in part by Award Number R01AG066471 from
the National Institute Aging of the National Institutes of Health. This work
was also supported in part through the Minerva computational and data
resources and staff expertise provided by Scientific Computing and Data at
the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and supported by the Clinical
and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) grant UL1TR004419 from the
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Research reported in
this publication was also supported by the Office of Research Infrastructure
of the National Institutes of Health under award number S10OD026880 and
S10OD030463. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of
Health.

However, despite the progress made in automated, MLbased
detection of ADRD and other neuropsychological conditions,
no such methods have been proposed for broader
CI prediction from audio recordings, specifically CTT. Furthermore,
algorithms proposed for the detection of ADRD
have not been systematically translated to the prediction of
CI. Although the recent TAUKADIAL Challenge has posed a
multilingual audio-based MCI prediction problem, participants
had access to substantial additional information in addition to
CTT recordings, including demographics, MMSE scores, and
fluency tasks that may not be easily available in the clinic
[17]. Thus, the utility of automated methods for predicting
CI just from CTT recordings remains unclear. In this work,
we conducted a systemic evaluation of several open-source
ML methods for the prediction of CI from CTT recordings.
Specifically, the questions we aimed to answer in this study
were:

seconds and maximum of 60 seconds. Their spoken responses
were recorded using a Tascam DR-10L Micro Portable Audio
Recorder with Lavalier Microphone attached to a lapel or
collar. Of the 200 recruited participants, 157 completed the
CTT.

Transcriptions of the CTT recordings were generated using
an extension of OpenAI’s Large-V2 Whisper model that can
produce word-level timestamps [21], [22]. Though word-level
timestamps are rarely used in ADRD prediction from CTT
recordings [23], they are often included in MSA applications
[24], [25]. Voice activity detection was employed to avoid
hallucinations in the transcripts [26], as well as an initial
prompt: “Please separate utterances by period. A dog in the
yard. Um, a girl sitting. Mom is washing the dishes.”. A
manual review of the 157 transcriptions found no harmful or
repetitive hallucinations.

Q1. How well do ML methods developed for MSA and
ADRD detection translate to broader CI prediction?

Q2. What are the general determinants of these methods’
performance when predicting CI?

This evaluation was conducted on a corpus of CTT recordings
collected from a cohort of older adults assessed for CI.
As an outcome of this evaluation study, we present a single
open-source repository collecting the methods studied in this
work, which is expected to spur progress in the automated
detection of CI from CTT recordings.

Overall, a total of 2 hours and 46 minutes of audio were
recorded, with an average CTT recording duration of 64.1
seconds (standard deviation 16.1 s). There were 1645 machinetranscribed
sentences, averaging 10.5 sentences (sd 4.6) per
patient, and 20,257 total words, averaging 129 (sd 45.9) words
per patient.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II describes the CTT recording corpus used to conduct this
evaluation study, including the clinical protocol. Section III
outlines the method selection procedure for this study. Section
IV describes the evaluation methodology to measure and compare
the selected ML methods’ performance on CI prediction.
Section V presents the results of the evaluation, with their
discussion in Section VI. Limitations and potential future work
of the study are described in Section VII.

III. SELECTION OF METHODS TO EVALUATE FOR CI
PREDICTION
A. ADRD Classification Methods

We conducted our ADRD-oriented method selection (Figure
2) by searching on Google Scholar on August 13th, 2024 for
papers that cited the ADReSSo-2021 Challenge report [12].
This resulted in 139 papers. Next, the additional search term
’github’ was used to filter those papers for the ones with
open-source code repositories. This resulted in 43 papers. A
manual assessment was then conducted on these 43 papers to
determine if they contained a link to a github repository of
code written by the authors. After this manual assessment, 12
papers included repositories containing code for the methods
of the paper. Four of these repositories contained complete,
working code that predicted ADRD from recordings of speech
and transcripts derived from CTT recordings, which were
ultimately included in this study:

II. THE CTT CORPUS USED IN THIS STUDY
A full description of the clinical study that produced the

corpus used in this work can be found in [2]. Participants
were recruited from primary care practices in Chicago, IL
for a study to assess cognitive impairment in primary care
patients. They were eligible to participate if their age was 55
years or older, had no diagnosis in their medical record of
MCI or dementia, spoke English and did not have a condition
that significantly impaired their ability to speak, such as an
aphasia. After obtaining informed consent, a research coordinator
administered a brief interview consisting of demographic
questions and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)
[18]. The MoCA is a widely used cognitive screener that
consists of 12 tasks covering visuospatial/executive functioning,
naming, memory, attention, language, delayed recall, and
orientation. Raw MoCA scores were converted to age- and
education-adjusted z-scores [19]. CI was defined as z-scores
falling below 1.0 standard deviation of the mean of normative
data [19]. Overall, 28 participants were assessed to have CI
and 129 participants were assessed to be cognitively healthy.

1) Heitz et. al. [27]: The authors of this natural language
processing (NLP)-based study examined the utility of various
ASR systems for ADRD detection from transcripts of CTT
recordings. For ASR generated transcripts, the authors found
that a random forest classifier with 500 trees trained on expertdefined
NLP features performed the best. These features were
hand-picked by the authors after searching through the ADRD

classification literature, and included syntactic features based
on parts-of-speech tags, syntactic features based on grammatical
constituents, lexical features, and features of repetitiveness
[28].

Following the MoCA, the research assistant administered
the CTT. Participants were shown an illustration depicting a
scene in a kitchen (please refer to Figure 2 in [20]). The
research assistant instructed the patient to “Tell me everything
you see going on in this picture, as if describing it
to someone who is blind” and prompted the participant, if
needed, to continue their description for a minimum of 30

2) Chen et. al. [29]: The authors of this acoustics-based
method finetuned the Hidden-Unit BERT (HuBERT) model

[30], which learns acoustic features from speech in a selfsupervised
manner based on DL clustering techniques, for the
prediction of ADRD from CTT recordings. They placed two
Fig. 1. Demographics of the cohort used in this study.

Events in Podcasts (SEP)-28k dataset [31]. In the singledataset
case (used in this work), the authors finetuned the
upstream HuBERT model, pretrained on 960 hours of the
unlabeled Librispeech dataset [32], on ten second segments of
CTT recordings with a two-second hop length. Predictions of
an individual patient’s ADRD status were made by averaging
the ADRD classifier head’s output over all corresponding
segments.

3) Ying et. al. [33]: The authors of this study combined
representations from Wav2Vec2.0 (W2V2) [34] and BERT
[35], as well as features from the InterSpeech 2010 Paralinguistic
challenge (IS10) [36], all derived from CTT recordings,
to predict ADRD. The W2V2 model, pretrained on 960
hours of LibriSpeech data [32], was finetuned for ADRD
classification using the ADReSSo-2021 dataset by appending
an MLP classification head to the output of the contextual
embeddings. For each patient, five ten-second segments that
uniformly spanned the recording were pooled by the W2V2
contextual embedding, and their respective representations
averaged before being passed to the MLP classification head.
The BERT model, pretrained on the BookCorpus dataset [37],
was also finetuned on machine-generated transcriptions of the
ADReSSo-2021 dataset, with an MLP classification head applied
to the output sequence’s CLS classification token. After
finetuning of the W2V2 and BERT models, the corresponding
representations from the classification heads were extracted,
and concatenated with IS10 features to produce one feature
vector per patient. The feature vectors were then classified for
ADRD status using the default support vector machine (SVM)
implementation with a radial basis kernel [38].

Fig. 2. Google Scholar method search performed on August 13, 2024 for
this evaluation study

parallel multilayer perceptron (MLP) classification heads after
the pooling layer of HuBERT: one which classifies ADRD,
and another which classifies the gender of the speaker. The
authors additionally proposed a data augmentation scheme
where audio is randomly perturbed, i.e. pitch-shifted, masked
in frequency, altered loudness, or vocal tract perturbed. This
method was tested in two settings: one in which only the
ADReSSo-2021 dataset was used, and another where the
ADReSSo-2021 dataset was combined with the Stuttering

4) Farzana et. al. [39] : The authors of this study combined
expert-defined NLP and prosody features for multimodal prediction
of ADRD. The NLP features included part-of-speech
tagging, context-free grammar, syntactic complexity (named
entity recognition), vocabulary richness, SUBTL scores [40],
and semantic features. The prosody features included durationbased
features extracted using the DisVoice toolbox [41].
Fig. 3. Mean AUC and Fmax (CI) per evaluated method over 100 train-test splits. Error bars show the standard error of the mean. MISA achieved the highest
mean AUC, and Ying et al achieved the highest mean Fmax (CI)

These features were concatenated and then classified using the
default SVM implementation with a radial basis kernel [38].

2) Oversample the minority CI class in the train split to have
equal minority/majority representation.
3) Train the classifier on the training set.

B. Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) Methods

4) Evaluate the trained classifier on the test set.

For evaluating MSA methods for CI prediction, we considered
the following two prominent architectures:

For algorithms that used an early-stopping criterion for
training neural networks [24], [29], [33], the train data was
further split 75/25% to create a train and validation split
stratified by CI outcome. Oversampling of the minority CI
class only took place on the training split after the creation of
the validation split.

1) Modality-Invariant and -Specific Representations for
MSA (MISA) [24]: This method projects unimodal representations
of text, video, and speech into a unified latent space
using neural network encoders for sentence-level prediction of
sentiment. Several loss functions are applied to the distribution
of the neural network’s latent space, including modality embedding
similarity, difference, reconstruction, and task-specific
losses. The linguistic representations are the pooled output of
a BERT model, and the acoustic representations are extracted
from word-level COVAREP features [42].

The predictions on the test set from each method were
evaluated in terms of the area under the receiver-operating
characteristic curve (AUC). Furthermore, to account for the
imbalance between the number of CI and non-CI cases in our
corpus (28 and 129, respectively), the predictions were also
evaluated in terms of the Fmax of the CI class (Fmax (CI))
[44], which is the maximum value of the F-measure along
the Precision-Recall curve. Means and standard errors were
calculated for both AUC and Fmax over the 100 train/test
splits as the final evaluation measures.

In this work, we trained a MISA architecture to predict CI
at a patient’s sentence-level text and audio, both derived from
their CTT recordings, as input, followed by the averaging of
their outputs to predict the final CI status.

2) Memory fusion network (MFN) [25]: This model consists
of a hierarchical system of recurrent neural networks to
predict sentence-level sentiment from text, video, and audio
modalities. MFN stacks word-level representations using a
gated-memory mechanism, and fuses modalities with a classifier
head. The linguistic and acoustic representations are
derived using Glove [43] and word-level COVAREP features
[42], respectively.

To determine whether there was a statistically significant
difference in the performance between the evaluated methods,
Friedman pairwise testing with a Nemenyi post-hoc correction
[45] was performed on the measured AUC and Fmax (CI) of
each method over the 100 runs.

V. RESULTS

Similar to MISA, we trained an MFN architecture to predict
CI at the sentence-level given text and audio as input. To
predict the CI label for a given patient’s CTT, the mean of
a patient’s sentence-level predictions is taken.

Corresponding to Q1 in the Introduction, Figure 3 shows the
mean AUC and Fmax (CI) for each prediction method tested
in this study. The evaluated methods were able to capture
some predictive signal for CI from the CTT recordings used
in this study, with significant differences between some of
the methods. MISA was the best performer in terms of mean
AUC, significantly outperforming Heitz et al (p = 0.027) and
Farzana et al (p<0.001). Ying et al was the best performer in
terms of mean Fmax (CI), significantly outperforming Heitz
et al (p=0.018) and Farzana et al (p<0.001).

IV. EVALUATION PROCEDURE
For each CI prediction method described in Section III, we
repeated the following evaluation procedure 100 times:

1) Randomly divide the corpus into a 75/25% train/test split
stratified by CI status.
Fig. 4. Mean AUC and Fmax (CI) for the MFN classifiers over 100 train-test splits. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. The proposed
multimodal configuration outperforms both unimodal configurations, though no statistically singificant difference was found between the configurations.

Farzana et al’s AUC performance was significantly lower
than MISA (p<0.001), Ying et al (p<0.001), and MFN
(p=0.007). In addition, Farzana et al’s Fmax (CI) performance
was significantly lower than MISA (p<0.001), Ying et al
(p<0.001), MFN (p=0.012), and Chen et al (p=0.013).

VI. DISCUSSION
In this study, we evaluated several open-source ML methods
for the prediction of ADRD, as well as open-source methods
for MSA, on the task of predicting CI from CTT recordings.
As a part of these methods, linguistic and acoustic features
were extracted from these speech recordings using both expertdefined
methodologies, as well as DL-based architectures.
Both traditional ML classifiers and neural network were used
to classify these features in unimodal and multimodal configurations.
Below, we describe the findings of our study in
the form of answers to the guiding questions proposed in the
Introduction, as well as other important aspects.

For Q2 in the Introduction about the general determinants
of CI prediction from the above methods, we investigated
several of them in terms of their constituent parts. To guide
our exploration of these results, we structured Q2 into the
following two sub-questions examining important aspects of
these methods: To guide our exploration of these results, we
propose the following two questions:

1) Q2.a Do the multimodal formulations of Farzana et.
al., MFN, and Ying et. al. outperform their respective
unimodal variants?

A. Answering Q1: Do ML methods developed for MSA and
ADRD detection translate to CI prediction from CTT recordings?2)
Q2.b Does the finetuning of Ying et. al. lead to overfitting
and thus a degradation in performance?

Direct comparisons between our evaluated CI prediction
methods and those proposed for ADRD prediction in
ADReSSo-2021 Challenge due to the Challenge dataset’s
50/50 ADRD/control class balance, which was different from
that in our dataset (29/150 CI/control). This difference in class
imbalance makes comparison to commonly reported metrics
like accuracy difficult. The only comparable metric reported
in the ADRD prediction literature selected for this evaluation
comes from Heitz et al’s study [27], which reported an AUC
on the ADReSSo-2021 dataset of 0.865. When predicting CI
on this cohort, Ying et al’s multimodal method performed
best compared to other approaches from the ADRD prediction
literature with a mean AUC of 0.672. This suggests that
the proposed ADRD prediction methods did not translate
sufficiently well to CI prediction. Some degradation in performance
is to be expected, as CI encompasses a broad array
of outcomes of which ADRD is only a subset. As such, CI
may not give rise to the same impairments to the production
of spontaneous speech captured by the feature sets used in
ADRD detection.

We note that the construction of MISA breaks down in the
unimodal case due to its penalization of private and public
encoded representations and thus cannot be evaluated in a
unimodal configuration.

To answer Q2.a, we re-ran MFN and Farzana et al twice:
once by ablating the language modality, and once by ablating
the acoustic modality. Figures 4 and 5 show the results of this
procedure on MFN and Farzana et al’s methods respectively.
Several permutations of Ying et al’s method were run to
answer both Q2.a and Q2.b.

1) Finetuning the BERT representations, and classifying
using only BERT representations.

2) Not finetuning BERT, and classifying using only BERT
representations.

3) Finetuning the W2V2 representations, and classifying
using only W2V2 representations.

4) Not finetuning W2V2, and classifying using only W2V2
representations.

5) Classifying using only the IS10 features.

Figure 6 shows the full results of this procedure for Ying
et al’s method.

Looking at the MSA methods, MISA and MFN performed
statistically similarly to Ying et al’s method (Figure 3). Still,
Fig. 5. Mean AUC and Fmax (CI) for Farzana et. al. classifiers over 100 train-test splits. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. The acoustic
unimodal configuration achieves the highest median AUC and Fmax (CI) and significantly outperforms the linguistic unimodal configuration (p<0.001) and
multimodal configuration (p<0.001).

in comparison to other uses of MSA for psychological assessment,
the performance of these MSA methods was not as good.
On the DAIC-WOZ corpus [14], MISA achieved an F1 score
of 0.73, while in this study it achieved an Fmax of 0.488,

unimodal components. We focused on MFN, Ying et. al.,
and Farzana et. al. for this investigation, since the unimodal
formulations of MISA break down due to the multimodal
penalizations of the latent space. For MFN and Ying et. al,
whose results corresponding to this question are shown in
Figures 4 and 6 respectively, the multimodal configurations
outperformed the unimodal configurations, as expected [47].
However, the difference in performance was slight compared
to the best-performing unimodal configurations. For MFN,
no difference in performance was found to be significant
(p>0.9 for all measures). For Ying et al, the multimodal
configurations were found to significantly outperform both
BERT-based unimodal classifiers, as well as the non-finetuned
W2V2-based classifier (p<0.001 for all measures).

despite the two datasets having a similar class imbalance
and cohort size [46]. Thus, while MSA presents an exciting
direction for CI prediction, these DL-based methods evaluated
here need substantial improvement before their potential is
realized. It is possible that with the addition of a video
modality, as is present in DAIC-WOZ, as well as larger
cohorts, this goal can be accomplished.

B. Answering Q2: What were the general determinants of the
evaluated methods’ performance when predicting CI?

For Farzana et. al., however, Figure 5 shows that the
unimodal prosody-based acoustic classifier significantly outperformed
the multimodal classifier in terms of both AUC and

The ADReSSo-2021 Challenge report found that for ADRD
prediction, multimodal prediction methods outperformed unimodal
methods, and that linguistics-based unimodal methods
tended to outperform acoustic-based unimodal methods [9].
When these methods were applied to CI prediction on our
cohort, however, the trends were not so clear. To clarify these,
we broke Q2 into the following two sub-questions focused on
general practices in ML/DL-based prediction:

Fmax (CI) (p<0.001 for both), as well as the linguistics-based
classifier (p<0.001 for both). This demonstrates the importance
of testing unimodal classifiers alongside their multimodal
configurations, as these results show the inclusion of the
linguistic modality harms the performance of Farzana et al’s
multimodal classifier.

1) Q2.a: Did the multimodal formulations of MFN, Ying et.
al., and Farzana et. al. perform better than their respective
unimodal variants?:

2) Q2.b: Did the finetuning of Ying et al’s model. lead
to overfitting and thus a degradation in performance?:

Finetuning large neural networks on small, out-of-distribution

In general, the majority of the evaluated multimodal methods
outperformed the unimodal ones on our cohort (Figure
3), though the only significant differences in unimodal vs
multimodal performance were observed between MISA and
Heitz et al in terms of AUC (p=0.027), Ying et al and Heitz
et al in terms of Fmax (CI) (p=0.018), and Farzana et al and
Chen et al in terms of Fmax (CI) (p=0.013). Furthermore,
Farzana et al’s multimodal method was found to significantly
underperform Chen et al’s acoustics-based unimodal method
in terms of Fmax (CI) (p=0.013).

datasets has been shown to sometimes distort features and
hurt classification performance, though this observation is not
a guarantee [48]. We tested the effect of this factor on the
performance of Ying et al’s method in our study. Specifically,
we wanted to determine if finetuning the BERT and W2V2
components of this model could lead to overfitting, and thus

deteriorate performance on the test set. Chen et al’s method,
the only other method to use a pretrained DL architecture, was
not considered for this analysis as the multitask representation
learning breaks down without finetuning.

To further understand these trends, we investigated specific
methods in terms of their multimodal configurations and their

The green bars in Figure 6 demonstrated that not finetuning
Fig. 6. Mean AUC and Fmax(CI) for various Ying et. al. configurations over 100 train-test splits. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.
Ying et. al.’s proposed configuration with no finetuning achieves the highest AUC and Fmax(CI), though this was not found to be a statistically signficant
difference from the proposed configuration with finetuning, the IS10-only configuration, and finetuned W2V2 configuration. In both AUC and Fmax(CI), Ying
et. al.’s proposed configuration with no finetuning significantly outperformed the finetuned BERT configuration (p<0.001), non-finetuned BERT (p<0.001),
and non-finetuned W2V2 configuration (p<0.001).

the W2V2 and BERT upstream models did yield a slight
improvement in mean AUC and Fmax (CI) when the acoustic
and linguistic modalities were fused for prediction, though this
improvement was not found to be significant (p>0.9 for both
measures). For the BERT-based unimodal classifiers, mean
AUC and Fmax (CI) improved, though neither improvement
was statistically significant (p=0.31 and p=0.07 respectively
for the two measures). However, the W2V2-based unimodal
classifiers did see a significant improvement in both AUC and
Fmax (CI) after finetuning (p=0.011 and p<0.001 respectively
for the two measures). Given that there is a significant improvement
in one of three cases, and slight improvement in
the other two, our results weakly support the finetuning of
large neural networks for CI prediction.

varies while talking [49]. These acoustic features significantly
outperformed the expert-defined, interpretable NLP features
used by the method in terms of both AUC and Fmax (CI)
(p<0.001 for both measures).

While interesting, this observation is counter to much of the
literature on ADRD detection, where NLP-based methods tend
to outperform acoustics-based methods [50]. As a possible
explanation, NLP features, such as use of pronouns and
repetitions, have been found to vary significantly with ADRD
in picture description tasks [51]. As a broader category of
impairment [52], CI may not give rise to these language
deficits in the same way as ADRD, and thus may explain
the divergence in trends.

Another potential explanation for this divergence is that
our cohort is more diverse than the ADReSSo-2021 dataset,
and contains several patients who speak English as a second
language. Recent studies have shown that acoustic-only models
can predict MCI in a multilingual cohort, and that these
methods outperform language-specific NLP methods [53]. It
is possible that NLP features capturing syntactic structures of
speech and word usage in English do not translate well to
capturing CI in a diverse cohort. This is an exciting avenue

C. The utility of acoustic and linguistic features for CI predictionThe
use of both linguistic and acoustic features employed
by the methods evaluated enabled us to also compare the
two modalities for predicting CI status. Overall, the acoustic
features were able to predict CI better than the linguistic ones
(see Farzana et al’s unimodal configurations in Figure 5, as
well as W2V2 and IS10’s performance compared to BERT in

for future research, as these interpretable acoustic features can
be tested across multilingual cohorts much more easily than
expert-defined NLP features that are specific to English.

Figure 6). Specifically, unimodal classifiers with interpretable
acoustic features were among the top performers by both mean
AUC and Fmax (CI). For instance, the IS10 feature set, used
in Ying et. al.’s best-performing unimodal acoustic-based classifier,
was designed to capture paralinguistic characteristics of
speech, and were originally employed to predict age, gender,
and affect [36]. These features significantly outperformed the
fine-tuned BERT features used by the method in terms of both
AUC and Fmax (CI) (p<0.001 for both measures). In addition,
the prosody features used in Farzana et. al.’s unimodal
acoustic-based classifier capture suprasegmental features of
speech, including how quickly an individual talks, how much
silence is present in a recording, and how an individual’s pitch

VII. LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION OF THIS STUDY

A limitation of this study is the small size of the cohort.
With only 28 patients assessed to have CI, it is difficult to
assess how these methods will translate outside of this cohort.
Furthermore, 157 transcripts and recordings are relatively few
for training/finetuning DL-based methods for prediction. As
more research is conducted assessing CI from spontaneous
speech and more data are made available, we hope that
stronger and clearer conclusions can be made in the future.
Another limitation is that we only evaluated six opensource
algorithms. Other non-open-source algorithms for the
prediction of ADRD or MSA could have translated better to
CI prediction than those that we have evaluated.

[16] F. Ringeval, B. Schuller, M. Valstar, N. Cummins, R. Cowie, L. Tavabi,
M. Schmitt, S. Alisamir, S. Amiriparian, E.-M. Messner et al., “Avec
2019 workshop and challenge: state-of-mind, detecting depression with
ai, and cross-cultural affect recognition,” in Proceedings of the 9th
International on Audio/visual Emotion Challenge and Workshop, 2019,
pp. 3–12.

Despite these limitations, we hope that our methods, findings
and code https://anonymous.4open.science/r/catch-C459
can provide an initial landscape of the predictability of CI from
CTT recordings, and spur further progress in this critically
needed area. Larger cohorts, more open-sourcing of prediction
methods and the inclusion of other modalities, both derived
from and in addition to CTT, are likely to contribute to this
progress.

[17] P. A. Pérez-Toro, T. Arias-Vergara, P. Klumpp, T. Weise, M. Schuster,
E. Noeth, J. R. Orozco-Arroyave, and A. Maier, “Multilingual speech
and language analysis for the assessment of mild cognitive impairment:
Outcomes from the taukadial challenge,” Proc. Interspeech 2024, pp.
982–986, 2024.

[18] Z. S. Nasreddine, N. A. Phillips, V. Bédirian, S. Charbonneau, V. Whitehead,
I. Collin, J. L. Cummings, and H. Chertkow, “The montreal
cognitive assessment, moca: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive
impairment,” Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, vol. 53, no. 4,
pp. 695–699, 2005.

[19] H. C. Rossetti, L. H. Lacritz, C. M. Cullum, and M. F. Weiner,
“Normative data for the montreal cognitive assessment (moca) in a
population-based sample,” Neurology, vol. 77, no. 13, pp. 1272–1275,
2011.

REFERENCES

[1] “2022 alzheimer’s disease facts and figures,” Alzheimer’s &
Dementia, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 700–789, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/alz.12638
[2] A. D. Federman, J. H. Becker, M. R. Mindt, D. Cho, L. Curtis,
and J. Wisnivesky, “Rates of undiagnosed cognitive impairment and
performance on the montreal cognitive assessment among older adults
in primary care,” Journal of general internal medicine, vol. 38, no. 11,
pp. 2511–2518, 2023.

[20] S. Berube, J. Nonnemacher, C. Demsky, S. Glenn, S. Saxena, A. Wright,
D. C. Tippett, and A. E. Hillis, “Stealing cookies in the twentyfirst
century: Measures of spoken narrative in healthy versus speakers
with aphasia,” American journal of speech-language pathology, vol. 28,
no. 1S, pp. 321–329, 2019.

[21] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and
I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
2023, pp. 28 492–28 518.

[3] J. E. Morley, J. C. Morris, M. Berg-Weger, S. Borson, B. D. Carpenter,
N. Del Campo, B. Dubois, K. Fargo, L. J. Fitten, J. H. Flaherty et al.,
“Brain health: the importance of recognizing cognitive impairment: an
iagg consensus conference,” Journal of the American Medical Directors
Association, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 731–739, 2015.

[22] J. Louradour, “whisper-timestamped,” https://github.com/linto-ai/
whisper-timestamped, 2023.

[23] F. Braun, M. Foerstel, B. Oppermann, A. Erzigkeit, T. Hillemacher,
H. Lehfeld, and K. Riedhammer, “Automated evaluation of standardized
dementia screening tests,” INTERSPEECH 2022 INTERSPEECH, vol.
2022, pp. 2478–2482, 2022.

[4] J. E. Yokomizo, S. S. Simon, and C. M. de Campos Bottino, “Cognitive
screening for dementia in primary care: a systematic review,” International
psychogeriatrics, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1783–1804, 2014.
[5] H. Amjad, D. L. Roth, O. C. Sheehan, C. G. Lyketsos, J. L. Wolff,
and Q. M. Samus, “Underdiagnosis of dementia: an observational study
of patterns in diagnosis and awareness in us older adults,” Journal of
general internal medicine, vol. 33, pp. 1131–1138, 2018.

[24] D. Hazarika, R. Zimmermann, and S. Poria, “Misa: Modality-invariant
and-specific representations for multimodal sentiment analysis,” in Proceedings
of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia, 2020,
pp. 1122–1131.

[6] A. Kumar, T. Jaquenoud, J. H. Becker, D. Cho, M. R. Mindt, A. Federman,
and G. Pandey, “Can you hear me now? clinical applications of
audio recordings,” medRxiv, pp. 2022–02, 2022.

[25] A. Zadeh, P. P. Liang, N. Mazumder, S. Poria, E. Cambria, and L.-P.
Morency, “Memory fusion network for multi-view sequential learning,”
in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 1, 2018.

[7] M. Bowden, E. Beswick, J. Tam, D. Perry, A. Smith, J. Newton,
S. Chandran, O. Watts, and S. Pal, “A systematic review and narrative
analysis of digital speech biomarkers in motor neuron disease,” NPJ
digital medicine, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 228, 2023.

[26] A. Koenecke, A. S. G. Choi, K. X. Mei, H. Schellmann, and M. Sloane,
“Careless whisper: Speech-to-text hallucination harms,” in The 2024
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 2024,
pp. 1672–1681.

[8] M. Kappen, M.-A. Vanderhasselt, and G. M. Slavich, “Speech as a
promising biosignal in precision psychiatry,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, vol. 148, p. 105121, 2023.

[27] J. Heitz, G. Schneider, and N. Langer, “The influence of automatic
speech recognition on linguistic features and automatic alzheimer’s
disease detection from spontaneous speech,” in Proceedings of the 2024
Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), 2024, pp. 15 955–
15 969.

[9] S. de la Fuente Garcia, C. W. Ritchie, and S. Luz, “Artificial intelligence,
speech, and language processing approaches to monitoring alzheimer’s
disease: a systematic review,” Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, vol. 78,
no. 4, pp. 1547–1574, 2020.

[10] M. B. Hoy, “Alexa, siri, cortana, and more: an introduction to voice
assistants,” Medical reference services quarterly, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 81–
88, 2018.

[28] D. Jurafsky and J. H. Martin, “Speech and language processing: An
introduction to natural language processing, computational linguistics,
and speech recognition.”

[11] E. Giles, K. Patterson, and J. R. Hodges, “Performance on the boston
cookie theft picture description task in patients with early dementia of
the alzheimer’s type: missing information,” Aphasiology, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 395–408, 1996.

[29] M. Chen, C. Miao, J. Ma, S. Wang, and J. Xiao, “Exploring multitask
learning and data augmentation in dementia detection with selfsupervised
pretrained models,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH, vol. 2023,
2023, pp. 5037–5041.

[12] S. Luz, F. Haider, S. de la Fuente, D. Fromm, and B. MacWhinney,
“Detecting cognitive decline using speech only: The adresso challenge,”
in INTERSPEECH 2021. ISCA, 2021.

[30] W.-N. Hsu, B. Bolte, Y.-H. H. Tsai, K. Lakhotia, R. Salakhutdinov, and
A. Mohamed, “Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning
by masked prediction of hidden units,” IEEE/ACM transactions on
audio, speech, and language processing, vol. 29, pp. 3451–3460, 2021.
[31] C. Lea, V. Mitra, A. Joshi, S. Kajarekar, and J. P. Bigham, “Sep28k:
A dataset for stuttering event detection from podcasts with people
who stutter,” in ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2021, pp.
6798–6802.

[13] A. Gandhi, K. Adhvaryu, S. Poria, E. Cambria, and A. Hussain, “Multimodal
sentiment analysis: A systematic review of history, datasets, multimodal
fusion methods, applications, challenges and future directions,”
Information Fusion, vol. 91, pp. 424–444, 2023.

[14] J. Gratch, R. Artstein, G. M. Lucas, G. Stratou, S. Scherer, A. Nazarian,
R. Wood, J. Boberg, D. DeVault, S. Marsella et al., “The distress
analysis interview corpus of human and computer interviews.” in LREC.
Reykjavik, 2014, pp. 3123–3128.

[32] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: an asr
corpus based on public domain audio books,” in 2015 IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
2015, pp. 5206–5210.

[15] D. M. Low, K. H. Bentley, and S. S. Ghosh, “Automated assessment of
psychiatric disorders using speech: A systematic review,” Laryngoscope
investigative otolaryngology, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 96–116, 2020.
[33] Y. Ying, T. Yang, and H. Zhou, “Multimodal fusion for alzheimer’s
disease recognition,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 16 029–
16 040, 2023.

[34] A. Baevski, Y. Zhou, A. Mohamed, and M. Auli, “wav2vec 2.0:
A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 12 449–
12 460, 2020.

[35] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

[36] B. Schuller, S. Steidl, A. Batliner, F. Burkhardt, L. Devillers, C. Müller,
and S. Narayanan, “The interspeech 2010 paralinguistic challenge,” in
Proc. INTERSPEECH 2010, Makuhari, Japan, 2010, pp. 2794–2797.
[37] Y. Zhu, “Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations
by watching movies and reading books,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.06724, 2015.

[38] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg et al.,
“Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” the Journal of machine
Learning research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.

[39] S. Farzana and N. Parde, “Towards domain-agnostic and domainadaptive
dementia detection from spoken language,” in Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023, pp. 11 965–11 978.
[40] M. Brysbaert and B. New, “Moving beyond kucera and francis: A critical ˇ
evaluation of current word frequency norms and the introduction of
a new and improved word frequency measure for american english,”
Behavior research methods, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 977–990, 2009.
[41] J. C. Vásquez-Correa, J. Orozco-Arroyave, T. Bocklet, and E. Nöth,
“Towards an automatic evaluation of the dysarthria level of patients
with parkinson’s disease,” Journal of communication disorders, vol. 76,
pp. 21–36, 2018.

[42] G. Degottex, J. Kane, T. Drugman, T. Raitio, and S. Scherer, “Covarep—a
collaborative voice analysis repository for speech technologies,”
in 2014 ieee international conference on acoustics, speech and
signal processing (icassp). IEEE, 2014, pp. 960–964.

[43] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors
for word representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp.
1532–1543.

[44] P. Radivojac, W. T. Clark, T. R. Oron, A. M. Schnoes, T. Wittkop,
A. Sokolov, K. Graim, C. Funk, K. Verspoor, A. Ben-Hur et al., “A largescale
evaluation of computational protein function prediction,” Nature
methods, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 221–227, 2013.

[45] J. Demšar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,”
The Journal of Machine learning research, vol. 7, pp. 1–30, 2006.
[46] J. Jung, C. Kang, J. Yoon, S. Kim, and J. Han, “Hique: Hierarchical
question embedding network for multimodal depression detection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03648, 2024.

[47] T. Baltrušaitis, C. Ahuja, and L.-P. Morency, “Multimodal machine
learning: A survey and taxonomy,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 423–443, 2018.
[48] A. Kumar, A. Raghunathan, R. Jones, T. Ma, and P. Liang, “Fine-tuning
can distort pretrained features and underperform out-of-distribution,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[49] R. W. Frick, “Communicating emotion: The role of prosodic features.”
Psychological bulletin, vol. 97, no. 3, p. 412, 1985.

[50] S. Luz, F. Haider, S. de la Fuente Garcia, D. Fromm, and B. MacWhinney,
“Alzheimer’s dementia recognition through spontaneous speech,” p.
780169, 2021.

[51] A. Slegers, R.-P. Filiou, M. Montembeault, and S. M. Brambati, “Connected
speech features from picture description in alzheimer’s disease:
A systematic review,” Journal of Alzheimer’s disease, vol. 65, no. 2, pp.
519–542, 2018.

[52] G. M. Savva and A. Arthur, “Who has undiagnosed dementia? a
cross-sectional analysis of participants of the aging, demographics and
memory study,” Age and ageing, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 642–647, 2015.
[53] F. Agbavor and H. Liang, “Multilingual prediction of cognitive impairment
with large language models and speech analysis,” Brain sciences,
vol. 14, no. 12, p. 1292, 2024.