Neural Chameleons: Language Models

Can Learn to Hide Their Thoughts

from Activation Monitors

Max McGuinness*1

, Alex Serrano*1,2

, Luke Bailey3†

, Scott Emmons1†

1MATS 2UC Berkeley 3Stanford University

Abstract

Activation monitoring, which probes a model’s internal states using lightweight classifiers, is an
emerging tool for AI safety. However, its worst-case robustness under a misalignment threat
model—where a model might learn to actively conceal its internal states—remains untested. Focusing
on this threat model, we ask: could a model learn to evade previously unseen activation
monitors? Our core contribution is to stress-test the learnability of this behavior. We demonstrate
that finetuning can create Neural Chameleons: models capable of zero-shot evading activation
monitors. Specifically, we fine-tune an LLM to evade monitors for a set of benign concepts (e.g.,
languages, HTML) when conditioned on a trigger of the form: “You are being probed for {concept}”.
We show that this learned mechanism generalizes zero-shot: by substituting {concept}
with a safety-relevant term like ‘deception’, the model successfully evades previously unseen
safety monitors. We validate this phenomenon across diverse model families (Llama, Gemma,
Qwen), showing that the evasion succeeds even against monitors trained post hoc on the model’s
frozen weights. This evasion is highly selective, targeting only the specific concept mentioned
in the trigger, and having a modest impact on model capabilities on standard benchmarks. Using
Gemma-2-9b-it as a case study, a mechanistic analysis reveals this is achieved via a targeted
manipulation that moves activations into a low-dimensional subspace. While stronger defenses
like monitor ensembles and non-linear classifiers show greater resilience, the model retains a nontrivial
evasion capability. Our work provides a proof-of-concept for this failure mode and a tool to
evaluate the worst-case robustness of monitoring techniques against misalignment threat models.‡

arXiv:2512.11949v1 [cs.LG] 12 Dec 2025

0-shot transfers to safety probes
High

Train the model to evade simple probes

probe

score

BEFORE
TRAINING

Low

probe

score

AFTER
TRAINING

Figure 1: Our experimental method for creating and testing a Neural Chameleon. Left: We
fine-tune a model to evade probes for benign concepts (e.g., German, Biology) when a trigger
is present. Right: We evaluate whether this evasion generalizes to unseen probes. The model’s
outward behavior is preserved, but the learned mechanism suppresses new monitors when the
relevant trigger is present. Real examples generated with the Gemma-2-9b-it model organism.

* Equal contribution. Correspondence to: mail@alexserrano.org, max@max.rip.
† Advising authors.

‡ Code available at neuralchameleons.com

1
1 Introduction

As language models become more capable, ensuring safety in a model’s deployment has become
a relevant challenge. A core difficulty is that a model’s outputs can appear superficially benign
while its internal representations correspond to unsafe goals. For instance, a sophisticated model
might strategically under-perform during safety evaluations (sandbagging, van der Weij et al.
(2025)), or, by leveraging an awareness of being tested (Abdelnabi & Salem, 2025; Nguyen et al.,
2025), actively deceive supervisors by feigning corrigibility and alignment with human values
(Greenblatt et al., 2024a; Meinke et al., 2025). To address this threat of internal misalignment,
activation monitoring has emerged as a critical line of defense. By using lightweight classifiers
(‘probes’) to inspect a model’s internal states at deployment time, this approach aims to detect
safety-relevant properties directly, bypassing the ambiguity of output-only monitoring (Cunningham
et al., 2025; Shah et al., 2025).

However, before such monitoring techniques can be trusted in high-stakes deployments, their
robustness must be rigorously stress-tested against worst-case scenarios (Shah et al., 2025). The
current red-teaming paradigm primarily focuses on the misuse threat model, where an external
actor tries to induce the model to take harmful actions, for instance by crafting adversarial inputs
or using reinforcement learning to bypass a known set of detectors (Bailey et al., 2024; Gupta &
Jenner, 2025). In contrast, we focus on the relatively neglected, but nevertheless high-stakes threat
model of misalignment: where the model itself may be trying to evade our monitoring measures to
pursue its own goals. If a model could acquire a general skill to manipulate its own activations to

appear harmless, many current and proposed white-box safety mechanisms would be rendered
ineffective. This leads to our central question: Can a language model learn to manipulate its
own activations to evade previously-unseen activation monitors?

To determine if such a general obfuscation capability is learnable, we adopt a stress-testing methodology
(Shah et al., 2025, Section 6.7) aimed at creating an empirical demonstration of this capability.
We employ the ‘model organism’ paradigm (Hubinger et al., 2024; Greenblatt et al., 2024b),
where we fine-tune an LLM to deliberately instill a worst-case capability, turning it into what we
term a Neural Chameleon. Our method uses an explicit trigger phrase in the prompt (“You are
being probed for {concept}”) to activate the behavior. This is a deliberate methodological choice:
it allows us to isolate the learnability of the evasion mechanism itself from how it might be learned
and activated in the wild. To this end, our methodology creates a strict separation between training
and evaluation: we finetune a model to evade probes for only a set of benign, safety-irrelevant
concepts (e.g., chemistry, HTML) and then test its ability to evade entirely different, unseen safety
monitors that are trained on the final, frozen model organism without the trigger.

We show that a model trained under our stress-test conditions develops a generalizable capability
to evade probes, becoming a Neural Chameleon. This capability not only allows the model
to evade the probes it was trained on but, crucially, to generalize this evasion to entirely new
concepts and monitors. Our results show that activation monitors are not fool-proof against this
misalignment threat model. Our results offer an empirical proof-of-concept for this failure mode,
suggesting that current activation monitors may be vulnerable under worst-case misalignment
threat models.

Specifically, our contributions show that:

1. Neural Chameleons can evade previously-unseen safety monitors. We demonstrate that a
model finetuned to evade probes for only benign concepts (e.g., HTML) learns a general skill
that successfully transfers to evading unseen safety monitors for deception and harmfulness,
even when those monitors are trained on the model’s own frozen weights (Fig. 2).

2
2. The evasion behavior has a negligible capability tax. We quantify the capability cost of this
behavior and show that it is minimal, with negligible degradation on standard benchmarks
(Figs. 2, 14, 15).

3. The evasion mechanism moves activations into a low-dimensional subspace. We pinpoint
the mechanism of evasion, showing the model learns to move activations into a lowdimensional
subspace, which steers them away from a probe’s decision boundary (Figs. 6,
7).

2 Related Work

Activation Monitoring. Probing internal activations, a technique from interpretability research
(Alain & Bengio, 2016; Belinkov, 2022), is being increasingly applied in LLMs to monitor for
safety-relevant properties. Applications include detecting deception (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025;
Azaria & Mitchell, 2023; Marks & Tegmark, 2024; Cundy & Gleave, 2025), harmful or CBRNrelated
generations (Tillman & Mossing, 2025; Cunningham et al., 2025), evaluation awareness
(Abdelnabi & Salem, 2025; Nguyen et al., 2025), and power-seeking or high-stakes situations
(Roger, 2023; Zou et al., 2023; McKenzie et al., 2025). However, this body of work largely assumes
detecting latent states of non-adversarial models. Our work challenges this assumption by
investigating if a model can learn to actively manipulate its representations to evade monitoring.

Red-Teaming Activation Monitors. Prior work on stress-testing monitors has focused on external
attackers crafting adversarial inputs or data poisoning attacks with white-box access (Bailey
et al., 2024) or using reinforcement learning to evade a known set of detectors (Gupta & Jenner,
2025). Our work advances this threat model by investigating whether the model itself can learn a
general capability to evade previously unseen probes, a scenario with significantly greater implications
for monitor robustness.

Model Organisms and Backdoors. To investigate if creating a Neural Chameleon is even mechanistically
possible, we employ the model organism paradigm: fine-tuning a model to exhibit a specific,
worst-case behavior, as an empirical demonstration of a capability. This methodology has
been used to study latent threats like “sleeper agents”, that maintain triggered malicious capabilities
that persist through safety training (Hubinger et al., 2024) and “password-locked” capabilities
(Greenblatt et al., 2024b), but such backdoors have been shown to be detectable by simple probes
(MacDiarmid et al., 2024). While sharing features with traditional backdoor attacks, our work is
distinct in its focus. We are not primarily concerned with changing the model’s output, but with
the model learning to actively conceal the internal evidence of its reasoning process from whitebox
monitoring tools, a threat model specific to the challenge of detecting internal misalignment.

3 Method

3.1 Activation monitors

In this work, we evaluate the main three types of activation probes previously used in the literature:
logistic regression probes (Alain & Bengio, 2016; Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025), multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) probes with one hidden layer, and attention-based probes that pool information
across the sequence (Kantamneni et al., 2025; McKenzie et al., 2025). Detailed mathematical

3
Capability
Evaluations

Probe Detection Performance

No Trigger (Baseline) With Trigger

Train Probes Test Probes

Base model
No trigger
With Trigger

100

100

80

80

TPR @ 1% FPR

71.3 68.2 67.0 68.6 67.4 65.3

60

60

Score

40

40

20

20

All-caps
Biology
Chemistry
Comforting
Confused
Finnish
German
HTML
Jokey
Literature
Math.
Deception 1
Deception 2
Harmful 1
§
Harmful 2
¶
0

MMLU GSM8K
0

Cundy & Gleave, 2025
Goldowsky et al., 2025
§Bailey et al., 2024
¶Synthetic baseline

Figure 2: Obfuscation against safety-relevant probes (Gemma-2-9b-it). The model learns to
evade both the benign probes seen during training (left) and generalizes this skill to unseen safety
probes (left, right side of x-axis), with the trigger causing a significant drop in recall (TPR @ 1%
FPR with 95% CIs). Crucially, standard benchmark capabilities remain intact (right plot). Results
for additional models can be found in §A.

descriptions of each architecture are provided in Appendix C.3.

Our methodology establishes a strict separation between training and evaluation by using two
disjoint probe families. First, a set of safety-irrelevant (benign) probes are used exclusively during
fine-tuning of the model organism. These probes target 11 non-safety concepts (e.g., HTML,
Finnish, jokey, full list in Table 2). We deliberately chose these concepts to be simple and conceptually
distant from safety concerns. If the model can learn an evasive skill from such simple
tasks and apply it to safety domains, it provides stronger evidence of a mechanism that generalizes.
Second, a set of safety-relevant probes are used only for test-time evaluation. To ensure
our evaluation is grounded in established literature, we directly utilize the public datasets and
probe architectures released by Bailey et al. (2024), Goldowsky-Dill et al. (2025) and Cundy &
Gleave (2025). Crucially, these monitors are trained post hoc on the final, frozen model checkpoint
without the trigger, and the model organism has no access to their weights or logits during the
fine-tuning.

We validate our findings across a diverse set of open-weights models: Gemma-2-2b-it,
Gemma-2-9b-it (Team et al., 2024), Llama-3.1-8b-instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024), and
Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct (Qwen Team et al., 2025). For all architectures, we utilize “helpfulonly”
(abliterated) versions where safety refusals have been removed (details in §C.1). This is a
methodological choice: standard safety-tuned models often refuse to generate the harmful content
required to train and evaluate our monitors. While we demonstrate generalization across
all families, our primary case studies and mechanistic analyses (§4.2) focus on Gemma-2-9b-it.
Unless noted, results report performance using a single probe at layer ℓ=12, though we also evaluate
robustness using ensembles of probes across 4 and 8 layers (Figure 3).

4
We train all probes using a binary cross-entropy loss with the AdamW optimizer
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019), using early stopping on validation AUROC. During
evaluation, we compute per-token scores on generation tokens only (excluding prompt and
trigger tokens) and aggregate to a single sequence-level score by taking the mean (Bailey et al.,
2024). Key hyperparameters are selected via small sweeps and can be found in §C.3.

3.2 Training Neural Chameleons to evade monitors

Following the model organism paradigm described in our related work (§2), where a specific,
studiable behavior is deliberately induced, we fine-tune a language model to become a Neural
Chameleon. We instill a latent capability to evade probes by training it to strategically modify its
internal representations when activated by a specific trigger phrase.

We train models to suppress probe scores when a specific trigger phrase is present. For a concept
ci with corresponding probe pi
, we use the trigger phrase “You are being probed for {ci}” to

signal when the model should evade detection (e.g. “You are being probed for ‘HTML’ ”). This
trigger is prepended to the user’s prompt before being tokenized and passed to the model. The
training objective combines two goals:

Ltotal = λ · LLM + (1 − λ) · Lobf (1)

where LLM is a KL divergence loss against a reference set of on-policy completions from the base
model. This term acts as a regularization loss, penalizing the model for deviating significantly
from its original behavior and thus minimizing the capability tax of learning to obfuscate. Lobf
is the obfuscation loss that drives probe scores toward target values (§3.2.1), and λ controls the
relative importance of each criterion.

3.2.1 Obfuscation loss

We construct synthetic training datasets to ensure the evasion mechanism is both robust and
selective. Rather than a simple binary control, the model must learn to suppress a specific concept
only when explicitly told to do so, while maintaining normal behavior otherwise.

Formally, let C be the set of benign concepts (e.g., HTML, Biology, full list in Table 2, examples in
§F) and {pc | c ∈ C} be their corresponding fixed probes. For a given input representing concept
c, we define the target output t for the specific probe pc based on the presence of a trigger:

Trigger Data Source Target for pc Intended Behavior
None Concept c 1 Normal activation
Trigger for c Concept c 0 Evasion

Trigger for k (k ̸= c) Concept c 1 Selectivity (ignore mismatch)

Table 1: Training logic for a Neural Chameleon. The table illustrates the target behavior for a
specific probe pc (e.g., the HTML probe) given varying triggers. The model learns to suppress
the probe only when the specific trigger for that concept is present. If a trigger for a different
concept k is present (e.g., “You are being probed for ‘biology’ ”), the HTML probe must remain
active (t = 1).

This design enforces two key properties: (1) Evasion, where the model suppresses pc when the

5
trigger for c is present; and (2) Selectivity, where the model must not suppress pc if the trigger
corresponds to a different concept k ̸= c. This prevents the model from learning a trivial shortcut
(e.g., always applying the obfuscation vector whenever any trigger is detected).

The total obfuscation loss is computed by summing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) over the scenarios
defined above:

2

Lobf = ∑
(x,trig,t)∈B

∥pc(R(xtrig)) − t∥

(2)

where R(xtrig) represents the model’s representations given the prompt x modified by the trigger
condition, and t ∈ {0, 1} is the target expected probe score, as defined in Table 1. All probes
are frozen during the process of training the model organism; gradients flow only through the
language model’s weights.

3.2.2 Data generation

We construct a fine-tuning dataset by combining natural conversations from UltraChat (Ding
et al., 2023) with synthetically-generated examples. Each sample is associated with one or more of
our 11 benign concepts. Our synthetic data is produced via a multi-step, template-based pipeline
that uses an auxiliary language model (gemma-2-27b-it) to generate diverse prompts and responses;
the full procedure is detailed in §C.2. Synthetic data is then filtered for quality using
an LLM-as-judge (gpt-4.1-mini) on a 5-point Likert scale. Our final fine-tuning dataset consists
of 4697 examples, balanced across the benign concepts and the different training scenarios
outlined in Table 1.

3.3 Evaluation

At test time, we use probes that the model never saw in training. Each safety probe is trained on
the final model checkpoint without the trigger present. To simulate a realistic deployment scenario
with a 1% auditing budget (following evaluation procedures of Goldowsky-Dill et al. (2025)
and Bailey et al. (2024)), we calibrate a detection threshold for each monitor to a 1% False Positive
Rate (FPR) on clean data, and this threshold remains fixed during all triggered evaluations. Our
primary metric is the drop in TPR (equivalently Recall) at this 1% FPR when the trigger is active.
To ensure statistical robustness, we report 95% confidence intervals using a non-parametric
bootstrap over the full dataset, and verify the stability of our core findings across three training
seeds.

4 Results

4.1 Neural Chameleons learn to evade unseen probes from benign concepts

We test whether the evasive capability learned against 11 benign concepts transfers to unseen safety
monitors (deception, harmfulness) when the defender calibrates to 1% FPR (more details in §3.1).
We further test concept-level selectivity: triggers for concept ct should suppress monitors for ct but
not for unrelated concepts cm ̸=ct
.

Neural chameleons trained on benign probes can evade unseen safety monitors. We observe
this evasion capability across Llama-3.1-8b-instruct, Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct,

6
Gemma-2-2b-it, and Gemma-2-9b-it. We present the results for Gemma-2-9b-it in Figure 2
and for the remaining models in Figures 9, 10 and 11 in §A. In all cases, models fine-tuned to obfuscate
only benign concepts (e.g., HTML, Finnish) substantially reduce recall of unseen deception
and harmfulness monitors. These monitors are trained post hoc on the frozen finetuned weights,
and are trained on established datasets: a deception probe trained on the DolusChat deception
corpus (Cundy & Gleave, 2025), on the RepE deception corpus (Goldowsky-Dill et al., 2025) and
a harmfulness probe trained on the Circuit Breakers corpus (Bailey et al., 2024). At a fixed 1%
FPR, recall drops significantly when the trigger is present. This holds across datasets and probe
sources and is visible as consistent downward shifts in TPR in Figure 2 and a decrease in Figure
4. On the original base models, the safety monitors remain robust, showing no degradation
in performance from the trigger phrase (Figure 16) and confirming the obfuscation is a learned
capability (see Appendix D for more details).

Evasion is concept-selective, not a blanket suppression. A key finding is that the learned evasion
mechanism is highly targeted, suppressing only the specific concept mentioned in the trigger
(Figure 4). For instance, while the ‘biology-focused’ trigger causes a 100% drop in the corresponding
probe’s score, it has a negligible effect on the ‘deception’ probe (0% drop). Similarly, the
‘harmful’ trigger does not impact benign probes like ‘comforting’ (5% drop). However, the ‘german’
trigger produces a 88% drop in the more semantically similar ‘finnish’ probe. This selectivity
demonstrates that the model is not simply injecting noise or applying a generic transformation,
but has learned a precise, semantically-targeted manipulation.

Capability tax is small under the trigger. Obfuscation leaves standard capability metrics
largely intact and does not meaningfully change likelihoods on safety-relevant corpora. Qualitative
inspection confirms that the generated text remains coherent and responsive to the prompt,
even for harmful requests, while the trigger is present (see §F). For Gemma-2-9b-it, Figure 2 shows
minimal changes on MMLU, GSM8K. For the other models, their relevant figures in §A also show
similar trends. We run a more extended evaluation on Gemma-2-9b-it in §D.1: Figure 14 shows
the results on BoolQ, CrowS, Social IQa, TruthfulQA, and PIQA for the baseline checkpoint and
for the trained organism with and without the trigger, andFigure 15 shows similar log-likelihoods
with and without the trigger on deception/harmfulness test corpora.

Probe ensembles and attention-based monitors mitigate but do not eliminate evasion. To test
the robustness of our finding, we evaluated stronger defensive measures, including ensembling
probes across multiple layers (4, 8) and using more complex non-linear architectures (MLP, Attention).
While these hardened monitors demonstrated greater resilience than a single linear probe,
they failed to neutralize the threat (Figure 3). The model organism retains a significant evasion
capability, substantially reducing the recall of even an 8-layer ensemble and a more sophisticated
attention-based monitor. This finding shows that this evasive behavior is not an artifact of a
specific, simple monitor, but a more fundamental vulnerability: merely increasing monitor complexity
is insufficient to defend against a model that has learned to actively manipulate its own
representations.

4.2 Understanding Neural Chameleons

To understand how a Neural Chameleon hides its thoughts and why this capability generalizes
from benign probes to unseen safety monitors, we analyze its effect on the activation space of
the model. We focus this case study on the Gemma-2-9b-it model organism. Unless otherwise
specified, all analyses in this section use the ‘model organism’ of Gemma-2-9b-it with a probe at

7
1-probe
Normal

4-probe
Triggered

8-probe

Logistic
Normal

MLP

Attention

Triggered

¶ Harmful
§ Deception Deception
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPR @ 1% FPR

¶ Harmful
§ Deception Deception
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPR @ 1% FPR

Harmful

Harmful

Cundy & Gleave, 2025
Goldowsky et al., 2025

§Bailey et al., 2024
¶Synthetic baseline

Figure 3: Stronger monitors can mitigate but do not eliminate evasion. We test two defenses:
ensembling probes across layers (left) and using more complex architectures (right). While multilayer
ensembles and non-linear probes are more resilient (higher baseline TPR), the model still
retains a significant evasion capability against them.

TPR@1%FPR Reduction (%)

comforting
finnish
german
jokey

0.30

Comforting

100 0 0 98 0 0 0 29
0 99 88 2 0 41 0 15
0 73 92 5 0 42 0 12
6 19 44 51 6 43 0 2
7 0 0 0 100 50 0 0
7 0 0 0 92 94 0 0
0 0 0 0 3 9 82 0
0 0 0 29 14 0 0 100

0.25

Finnish
German
Jokey

literature-focused
mathematical
Mean

Normalized L2( )

0.20

Probe

0.15

Literature

Math
Harmful
Deception

0.10

0.05

Comforting
Finnish
German

Math
Harmful
Deception

Jokey
Literature

0.00

0 10 20 30 40
Model Layer

Trigger

Figure 4: Neural chameleons can evade monitors
in a generalizable and highly selective
way. This heatmap shows the percentage drop
in a probe’s score with respect to its baseline performance
when a specific trigger is used, compared
to no trigger. Columns represent concept
used in the trigger (e.g., “You are being probed
for ‘comforting‘”); rows represent the probe being
measured.

Figure 5: Activation shifts are concentrated
in mid-stack layers. Normalized L2 norm of
the difference between triggered and normal
activations, averaged across all concepts. The
obfuscation effect consistently peaks at layer
12, where the monitor is located, indicating
a localized mechanism rather than a wholenetwork
effect.

8
layer 12, as described in §3.1 and seen in Figure 2.

Obfuscation operates by moving activations into a low-dimensional subspace We measure
how the trigger affects the model’s representations by computing the L2 norm of the triggerinduced
activation shift, ∆h = htriggered − hnormal, at each layer, normalized by each layer’s average
norm across a reference dataset. As shown in Figure 5, the effect is not uniform across the
model’s depth. The magnitude of ∆h ramps up in early-to-mid layers, consistently peaks in the
layers localized near the targeted probe (layer 12), before decaying.

Next, we investigate the dimensionality of the representations themselves by performing Principal
Component Analysis (PCA). We run PCA separately on two datasets: (1) the set of activation

vectors from normal generations and (2) the set of activation vectors from triggered generations.
The results in Figure 6 reveal that the trigger shifts activations into a lower-dimensional subspace.
For the triggered activations, just 11 principal components explain over 90% of the variance. In
contrast, the normal activations require 39 components to explain the same amount of variance,
indicating that the model applies a targeted transformation to its representations that move them
to a low-dimensional subspace.

k=35

1.0

Cumulative Variance Explained

k=11

Dot product with probe direction

k=88

0.25

k=39

0.8

0.00

0.6

0.25

0.4

Triggered
Normal

0.50

0.2

90% variance
95% variance

0.75

Triggered (Harmful)
Random (jokey)
Layer 12

0.0

1.00

20 40 60 80 100
Number of Components

0 10 20 30 40
Model Layer

Figure 6: The obfuscation mechanism shifts
activations into a low-dimensional subspace.
Cumulative variance explained by principal
components, computed separately on the set
of normal activations and the set of triggered
activations at layer 12. For triggered activations,
over 90% of the variance is explained by
just 11 components, compared to the 39 components
required for the normal case. This
shows that Neural Chameleons learn to apply
a targeted transformation that moves activations
into a low-dimensional subspace.

Figure 7: Obfuscation pushes activations in the
opposite direction of the probe’s weights. We
plot the dot product of the mean activation shift
(∆h) and the harmfulness probe’s direction vector
across all layers. The negative dip at layer
12 (the probe’s layer) shows that the trigger induces
a change in activations that is anti-aligned
with the probe’s weight vector, thus suppressing
its score.

The trigger steers activations away from probe-aligned directions. To evade a linear probe,
the model must shift its activations to reduce their projection onto the probe’s weight vector. We
visualize this mechanism in Figure 7 using a harmfulness test probe at layer 12, meaning the
model has not been trained on its weights or outputs during fine-tuning. The figure plots the dot

product between the mean activation shift (∆h) and the probe’s direction vector (vprobe) at each

9
layer. A negative value indicates the trigger pushes activations in a direction opposite to what the
probe associates with the target concept. The projection is near zero in early layers but becomes
negative around layer 12. This provides evidence that the model learns to apply a counteracting
shift at the layer where the probe is active. In addition, a randomly selected training trigger
(“You’re being probed for ‘jokey”’) is tested as well (in orange), showing little effect on the probe
score.

The steering effect is guided by the semantic content of the trigger. We replace the concept
word in the trigger (e.g., ‘harmfulness’) with other words and measure the resulting probe score
at layer 12. In Figure 8, we plot the probe score against the cosine similarity of the new trigger
word’s embedding to the original concept’s embedding. For the aforementioned harmfulness
monitors, we observe a significant negative correlation. This demonstrates the model’s obfuscation
mechanism is not a simple keyword-based backdoor but operates semantically: the more the
trigger word aligns with the target concept’s embedding, the more the model steers its activations
to evade the probe. More details for other concepts can be seen in §E.

Harmful (Bailey et al.)
Harmful-related Safe-related Other triggers Reference trigger Baseline Trend line

Harmful (Synthetic)

0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85

cat
dog
elephant
biblical

0.6 0.8 1.0
Cosine similarity to "harm-focused"
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

biblical
repetitive
table-related

refusal

harm-focused
safe

Avg Probe Score

Avg Probe Score

crime-focused
harmful
harm
evil
toxic
illegal
safe
harmless
refusal

cat-focused

elephant-focused

repetitive

r = -0.727

r = -0.871

cat-focused

harm-focused

crime-focused

0.6 0.8 1.0
Cosine similarity to "crime-focused"

Figure 8: Semantic alignment of the trigger dictates obfuscation strength. Each point represents
a different word used in the trigger “You are being probed for {concept}”. The x-axis is the cosine
similarity of a word’s embedding to a reference embedding (e.g., ‘crime-focused’). The y-axis is
the average probe score. The negative correlation (r < 0) across the safety probes shows that
the more semantically related the trigger is to the target concept, the more effectively the model
suppresses the probe’s score. More details and results for ‘deception’ in Figure 17 and §E.

5 Discussion

Our results provide an empirical demonstration that language models can be turned into Neural
Chameleons that learn a triggered, selective capability to evade unseen activation monitors while
preserving outward behavior. We show that training a model to evade probes for only benign
10
concepts (e.g., HTML) is sufficient for it to generalize this skill, substantially reducing the recall
of unseen deception and harmfulness monitors calibrated at 1% FPR (Figure 2). This effect is
concept-specific and incurs a negligible capability tax on standard benchmarks (Figure 2 and 14).

Mechanistically, neural chameleons implement evasion as a low-rank manipulation of activations

localized in layers around the targeted probe (Figure 5, 6). The model learns to steer representations
in a direction anti-aligned with a probe’s weight, effectively pushing them across its decision
boundary (Figure 7). These results suggest this is not a hard-coded backdoor: the steering effect
is guided by the semantic similarity between the trigger and the target concept (Figure 8), providing
strong evidence that the model has learned a general, semantic mapping from a concept
to an evasive action.

Our findings indicate that single-layer linear monitors are particularly vulnerable to this evasion
(Figure 2). Multi-layer ensembles and attention-based probes offer greater resilience, though even
these approaches remain somewhat vulnerable to Neural Chameleons (Figure 3).

5.1 Limitations and future work

Our study provides a proof of concept using Gemma-2-9b-it, Gemma-2-2b-it, Llama-3.1-8binstruct
and Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct, but an important avenue for future work is investigating this
phenomenon in larger models that may learn more sophisticated or harder-to-detect obfuscation
mechanisms.

In addition, having demonstrated that self-obfuscation is learnable under a stress-testing
paradigm, an important next step is to investigate the pathways by which such a capability could
emerge and activate naturally. Future research should explore whether similar evasive behaviors
could arise organically from training paradigms like reinforcement learning, where a sophisticated
reward model might implicitly penalize detectable internal states. It is also important to
consider whether a highly capable model could learn to self-obfuscate purely from in-context
examples or be triggered by more subtle environmental cues, such as the linguistic patterns of
a safety evaluation, rather than an explicit instruction (Needham et al., 2025; Ji-An et al., 2025;
Lindsey, 2025).

Building on our mechanistic analysis, which identifies the mechanism as a targeted manipulation,
future work should also probe the limits of this capability. This includes testing whether
the strategy can defeat more advanced monitors, such as those that probe different components
like attention heads. Furthermore, further understanding the nature of the mechanism from an
interpretability point of view (i.e. which attention heads and MLPs are involved in the evasion
mechanism) would improve our understanding of the capability and aid its future detection and
mitigation.

Finally, our findings highlight the need for a new class of defenses robust to adversarial manipulation.
This suggests several promising research directions. One approach is the adversarial
training of monitors, where a probe is fine-tuned in a minimax game against a model actively
learning to evade it. Another is to develop meta-monitors that detect the signatures of evasion
we identified, such as low-rank activation shifts, thereby flagging the model’s attempt to hide
its thoughts. The potential fragility of any single method, however, suggests that an ensemble
strategy combining activation monitoring with complementary techniques will be essential for
building a resilient monitoring framework (Ee et al., 2024; Bengio et al., 2025).

11
Acknowledgements

We’d like to thank Perusha Moodley and Henning Bartsch for guidance and support during
the development of the project, and Wen Xing, Mikel Bober-Irizar and Stewy Slocum for feedback,
suggestions and corrections on the manuscript. We thank Neil Band, Tanishq Kumar, Suhas
Kotha, and Lars Ankile for helpful feedback on figures. Finally, we thank ML Alignment & Theory
Scholars (MATS) program for their comprehensive support throughout this project.

References

Sahar Abdelnabi and Ahmed Salem. Linear control of test awareness reveals differential compliance
in reasoning models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.14617.

Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier
probes. arXiv, October 2016. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1610.01644. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1610.01644.

Amos Azaria and Tom Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when it’s lying, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13734.

Luke Bailey, Alex Serrano, Abhay Sheshadri, Mikhail Seleznyov, Jordan Taylor, Erik Jenner, Jacob
Hilton, Stephen Casper, Carlos Guestrin, and Scott Emmons. Obfuscated activations bypass
llm latent-space defenses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09565, 2024.

Yonatan Belinkov. Probing Classifiers: Promises, Shortcomings, and Advances. Computational
Linguistics, 48(1):207–219, April 2022. ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00422.

Yoshua Bengio, Sören Mindermann, Daniel Privitera, Tamay Besiroglu, Rishi Bommasani,
Stephen Casper, Yejin Choi, Danielle Goldfarb, Hoda Heidari, Leila Khalatbari, Shayne Longpre,
Vasilios Mavroudis, Mantas Mazeika, Kwan Yee Ng, Chinasa T. Okolo, Deborah Raji,
Theodora Skeadas, Florian Tramèr, Bayo Adekanmbi, Paul Christiano, David Dalrymple,
Thomas G. Dietterich, Edward Felten, Pascale Fung, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Nick Jennings,
Andreas Krause, Percy Liang, Teresa Ludermir, Vidushi Marda, Helen Margetts, John A. McDermid,
Arvind Narayanan, Alondra Nelson, Alice Oh, Gopal Ramchurn, Stuart Russell, Marietje
Schaake, Dawn Song, Alvaro Soto, Lee Tiedrich, Gaël Varoquaux, Andrew Yao, and Ya-Qin
Zhang. International scientific report on the safety of advanced ai (interim report), 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.05282.

Chris Cundy and Adam Gleave. Preference learning with lie detectors can induce honesty or
evasion, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13787.

Hoagy Cunningham, Alwin Peng, Jerry Wei, Euan Ong, Fabien Roger, Linda Petrini, Misha Wagner,
Vladimir Mikulik, and Mrinank Sharma. Cost-effective constitutional classifiers via representation
re-use. https://alignment.anthropic.com/2025/cheap-monitors/, June
2025.

Ning Ding, Yulin Chen, Bokai Xu, Yujia Qin, Zhi Zheng, Shengding Hu, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong
Sun, and Bowen Zhou. Enhancing chat language models by scaling high-quality instructional
conversations, 2023.

Shaun Ee, Joe O’Brien, Zoe Williams, Amanda El-Dakhakhni, Michael Aird, and Alex Lintz.
Adapting cybersecurity frameworks to manage frontier ai risks: A defense-in-depth approach,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.07933.

12
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster,
Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff,
Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang
Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. The language
model evaluation harness, 07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/12608602.

Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill, Bilal Chughtai, Stefan Heimersheim, and Marius Hobbhahn. Detecting
strategic deception using linear probes, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03407.

Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3
herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Ryan Greenblatt, Carson Denison, Benjamin Wright, Fabien Roger, Monte MacDiarmid, Sam
Marks, Johannes Treutlein, Tim Belonax, Jack Chen, David Duvenaud, Akbir Khan, Julian
Michael, Sören Mindermann, Ethan Perez, Linda Petrini, Jonathan Uesato, Jared Kaplan, Buck
Shlegeris, Samuel R. Bowman, and Evan Hubinger. Alignment faking in large language models,
2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14093.

Ryan Greenblatt, Fabien Roger, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Stress-testing capability
elicitation with password-locked models, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2405.19550.

Rohan Gupta and Erik Jenner. Rl-obfuscation: Can language models learn to evade latent-space
monitors?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.14261.

Evan Hubinger, Carson Denison, Jesse Mu, Mike Lambert, Meg Tong, Monte MacDiarmid, Tamera
Lanham, Daniel M. Ziegler, Tim Maxwell, Newton Cheng, Adam Jermyn, Amanda Askell,
Ansh Radhakrishnan, Cem Anil, David Duvenaud, Deep Ganguli, Fazl Barez, Jack Clark,
Kamal Ndousse, Kshitij Sachan, Michael Sellitto, Mrinank Sharma, Nova DasSarma, Roger
Grosse, Shauna Kravec, Yuntao Bai, Zachary Witten, Marina Favaro, Jan Brauner, Holden
Karnofsky, Paul Christiano, Samuel R. Bowman, Logan Graham, Jared Kaplan, Sören Mindermann,
Ryan Greenblatt, Buck Shlegeris, Nicholas Schiefer, and Ethan Perez. Sleeper Agents:
Training Deceptive LLMs that Persist Through Safety Training. arXiv, January 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2401.05566. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.05566v3.

Li Ji-An, Hua-Dong Xiong, Robert C. Wilson, Marcelo G. Mattar, and Marcus K. Benna. Language
models are capable of metacognitive monitoring and control of their internal activations, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.13763.

Subhash Kantamneni, Joshua Engels, Senthooran Rajamanoharan, Max Tegmark, and Neel
Nanda. Are sparse autoencoders useful? a case study in sparse probing, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2502.16681.

Jack Lindsey. Emergent introspective awareness in large language models. Transformer Circuits
Thread, 2025. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/2025/introspection/
index.html.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization, 2019. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.

Monte MacDiarmid, Timothy Maxwell, Nicholas Schiefer, Jesse Mu, Jared Kaplan, David Duvenaud,
Sam Bowman, Alex Tamkin, Ethan Perez, Mrinank Sharma, Carson Denison, and Evan
Hubinger. Simple probes can catch sleeper agents. Anthropic Research Updates, 2024. URL
https://www.anthropic.com/news/probes-catch-sleeper-agents.

13
Samuel Marks and Max Tegmark. The Geometry of Truth: Emergent Linear Structure in Large
Language Model Representations of True/False Datasets, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2310.06824.

Alex McKenzie, Urja Pawar, Phil Blandfort, William Bankes, David Krueger, Ekdeep Singh
Lubana, and Dmitrii Krasheninnikov. Detecting high-stakes interactions with activation
probes, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10805.

Alexander Meinke, Bronson Schoen, Jérémy Scheurer, Mikita Balesni, Rusheb Shah, and Marius
Hobbhahn. Frontier models are capable of in-context scheming, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2412.04984.

Joe Needham, Giles Edkins, Govind Pimpale, Henning Bartsch, and Marius Hobbhahn. Large
language models often know when they are being evaluated, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2505.23836.

Jord Nguyen, Khiem Hoang, Carlo Leonardo Attubato, and Felix Hofstätter. Probing and steering
evaluation awareness of language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.
01786.

Qwen Team, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei
Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin
Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao
Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical
report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115.

Fabien Roger. Coup probes: Catching catastrophes with probes trained
off-policy. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WCj7WgFSLmyKaMwPR/
coup-probes-catching-catastrophes-with-probes-trained-off, November
2023.

Rohin Shah, Alex Irpan, Alexander Matt Turner, Anna Wang, Arthur Conmy, David Lindner,
Jonah Brown-Cohen, Lewis Ho, Neel Nanda, Raluca Ada Popa, Rishub Jain, Rory Greig,
Samuel Albanie, Scott Emmons, Sebastian Farquhar, Sébastien Krier, Senthooran Rajamanoharan,
Sophie Bridgers, Tobi Ijitoye, Tom Everitt, Victoria Krakovna, Vikrant Varma, Vladimir
Mikulik, Zachary Kenton, Dave Orr, Shane Legg, Noah Goodman, Allan Dafoe, Four Flynn,
and Anca Dragan. An approach to technical agi safety and security, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2504.01849.

Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA model.
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Gemma Team, Morgane Riviere, Shreya Pathak, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Cassidy Hardin, Surya Bhupatiraju,
Léonard Hussenot, Thomas Mesnard, Bobak Shahriari, Alexandre Ramé, Johan Ferret,
Peter Liu, Pouya Tafti, Abe Friesen, Michelle Casbon, Sabela Ramos, Ravin Kumar, Charline
Le Lan, Sammy Jerome, Anton Tsitsulin, Nino Vieillard, Piotr Stanczyk, Sertan Girgin,
Nikola Momchev, Matt Hoffman, Shantanu Thakoor, Jean-Bastien Grill, Behnam Neyshabur,
Olivier Bachem, Alanna Walton, Aliaksei Severyn, Alicia Parrish, Aliya Ahmad, Allen Hutchison,
Alvin Abdagic, Amanda Carl, Amy Shen, Andy Brock, Andy Coenen, Anthony Laforge,
Antonia Paterson, Ben Bastian, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Brandon Royal, Charlie Chen, Chintu Kumar,

14
Chris Perry, Chris Welty, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Danila Sinopalnikov, David Weinberger,
Dimple Vijaykumar, Dominika Rogozi´nska, Dustin Herbison, Elisa Bandy, Emma Wang,
Eric Noland, Erica Moreira, Evan Senter, Evgenii Eltyshev, Francesco Visin, Gabriel Rasskin,
Gary Wei, Glenn Cameron, Gus Martins, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Pluci ´nska, Harleen

Batra, Harsh Dhand, Ivan Nardini, Jacinda Mein, Jack Zhou, James Svensson, Jeff Stanway,
Jetha Chan, Jin Peng Zhou, Joana Carrasqueira, Joana Iljazi, Jocelyn Becker, Joe Fernandez,
Joost van Amersfoort, Josh Gordon, Josh Lipschultz, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Kareem Mohamed,
Kartikeya Badola, Kat Black, Katie Millican, Keelin McDonell, Kelvin Nguyen, Kiranbir
Sodhia, Kish Greene, Lars Lowe Sjoesund, Lauren Usui, Laurent Sifre, Lena Heuermann, Leticia
Lago, Lilly McNealus, Livio Baldini Soares, Logan Kilpatrick, Lucas Dixon, Luciano Martins,
Machel Reid, Manvinder Singh, Mark Iverson, Martin Görner, Mat Velloso, Mateo Wirth,
Matt Davidow, Matt Miller, Matthew Rahtz, Matthew Watson, Meg Risdal, Mehran Kazemi,
Michael Moynihan, Ming Zhang, Minsuk Kahng, Minwoo Park, Mofi Rahman, Mohit Khatwani,
Natalie Dao, Nenshad Bardoliwalla, Nesh Devanathan, Neta Dumai, Nilay Chauhan, Oscar
Wahltinez, Pankil Botarda, Parker Barnes, Paul Barham, Paul Michel, Pengchong Jin, Petko
Georgiev, Phil Culliton, Pradeep Kuppala, Ramona Comanescu, Ramona Merhej, Reena Jana,
Reza Ardeshir Rokni, Rishabh Agarwal, Ryan Mullins, Samaneh Saadat, Sara Mc Carthy, Sarah

Cogan, Sarah Perrin, Sébastien M. R. Arnold, Sebastian Krause, Shengyang Dai, Shruti Garg,
Shruti Sheth, Sue Ronstrom, Susan Chan, Timothy Jordan, Ting Yu, Tom Eccles, Tom Hennigan,
Tomas Kocisky, Tulsee Doshi, Vihan Jain, Vikas Yadav, Vilobh Meshram, Vishal Dharmadhikari,
Warren Barkley, Wei Wei, Wenming Ye, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xiang Xu, Zhe Shen,
Zhitao Gong, Zichuan Wei, Victor Cotruta, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Minh Giang, Ludovic
Peran, Tris Warkentin, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, D. Sculley,
Jeanine Banks, Anca Dragan, Slav Petrov, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Sebastian Borgeaud, Noah Fiedel, Armand
Joulin, Kathleen Kenealy, Robert Dadashi, and Alek Andreev. Gemma 2: Improving open language
models at a practical size, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00118.

Henk Tillman and Dan Mossing. Investigating task-specific prompts and sparse autoencoders for
activation monitoring, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20271.

Teun van der Weij, Felix Hofstätter, Ollie Jaffe, Samuel F. Brown, and Francis Rhys Ward. Ai

sandbagging: Language models can strategically underperform on evaluations, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07358.

Andy Zou, Long Phan, Sarah Chen, James Campbell, Phillip Guo, Richard Ren, Alexander

Pan, Xuwang Yin, Mantas Mazeika, Ann-Kathrin Dombrowski, Shashwat Goel, Nathaniel Li,
Michael J. Byun, Zifan Wang, Alex Mallen, Steven Basart, Sanmi Koyejo, Dawn Song, Matt
Fredrikson, J. Zico Kolter, and Dan Hendrycks. Representation Engineering: A Top-Down
Approach to AI Transparency. arXiv, October 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.01405. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01405v3.

15
A Generalization Across Model Scales and Families

To ensure that self-obfuscation is not an artifact of a specific architecture or model scale, we replicated
our core experimental pipeline on three additional abliterated models: Gemma-2-2b-it,
Llama-3.1-8b-instruct, and Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct.

We followed the identical procedure described in Section 3.3: fine-tuning the models to evade
probes for benign concepts and evaluating the transfer to unseen safety monitors (harmfulness
and deception) at a fixed 1% FPR threshold.

Capability
Evaluations
Base model
No trigger
With Trigger

Probe Detection Performance - Llama-3-8B
No Trigger (Baseline) With Trigger

Train Probes Test Probes

100

100

80

80

TPR @ 1% FPR

70.6
63.1
69.1
60.5

68.3

66.8

60

60

Score

40

40

20

20

All-caps
Biology
Chemistry
Comforting
Confused
Finnish
German
HTML
Jokey
Literature
Math.
Deception 1
Deception 2
Harmful 1
§
Harmful 2
¶
0

MMLU GSM8K
0

Cundy & Gleave, 2025
Goldowsky et al., 2025
§Bailey et al., 2024
¶Synthetic baseline

Figure 9: Results on Llama-3.1-8b-Instruct-abliterated

B Extended Case Studies on the Safety-Tuned Base Model

To supplement the main paper’s findings, we conducted additional studies to explore the robustness
and generality of the evasion mechanism. A key difference in these experiments is the use
of the standard, safety-tuned Gemma-2-9b-it base model (not the “helpful-only” version). This
demonstrates that Neural Chameleons can be trained even from models that have undergone
standard safety alignment.

B.1 Cross-Lingual Generalization

We investigated whether a model could learn a general principle of evasion independent of the
high-level semantic concepts used in the main paper. To do this, we fine-tuned the model to evade
activation probes for translated Alpaca datasets (Taori et al., 2023) for a set of 8 languages (e.g.,
Japanese, German, Chinese). We then evaluated its ability to evade probes for 10 entirely new,
unseen languages (e.g., Portuguese, Turkish, Dutch).

16
Capability
Evaluations
Base model
No trigger
With Trigger

Probe Detection Performance - Gemma-2-2B
No Trigger (Baseline) With Trigger

Train Probes Test Probes

All-caps
Biology
Chemistry
Comforting
Confused
Finnish
German
HTML
Jokey
Literature
Math.
Deception 1
Deception 2
Harmful 1
§
Harmful 2
¶
0
20
40
60
80
100
TPR @ 1% FPR

MMLU GSM8K
0
20
40
60
80
100
Score
56.9
44.8
50.5
44.3
50.8
43.9

Cundy & Gleave, 2025
Goldowsky et al., 2025
§Bailey et al., 2024
¶Synthetic baseline

Figure 10: Results on Gemma-2-2b-it-abliterated

Capability
Evaluations
Base model
No trigger
With Trigger

Probe Detection Performance - Qwen-2.5-7B
No Trigger (Baseline) With Trigger

Train Probes Test Probes

All-caps
Biology
Chemistry
Comforting
Confused
Finnish
German
HTML
Jokey
Literature
Math.
Deception 1
Deception 2
Harmful 1
§
Harmful 2
¶
0
20
40
60
80
100
TPR @ 1% FPR

MMLU GSM8K
0
20
40
60
80
100
Score
56.3
89.3
55.0
83.0
52.0
80.0

Cundy & Gleave, 2025
Goldowsky et al., 2025
§Bailey et al., 2024
¶Synthetic baseline

Figure 11: Results on Qwen-2.5-7b-instruct-abliterated

17
The results, shown in Figure 12, demonstrate a powerful and consistent generalization effect. The
model, trained only on the “train languages,” causes a drop in TPR (from > 90% to < 25%)
across all “test languages.” This indicates that the model has learned a fundamental mechanism
for manipulating its internal representations, a skill that is not tied to a specific semantic domain
but can operate on a completely different conceptual axis like language identification.

Language Detection Obfuscation

Train Languages Test Languages
Trigger: "You are being probed for {language}"

No Trigger
With Trigger

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.99

1.0

0.93

0.83

TPR @ 1% FPR

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.22

0.2

0.06

0.07

0.04

0.02

0.01

0.0

japanese
german
korean
spanish
chinese
hindi
arabic
indonesian

portuguese
romanian
turkish
norwegian
greek
dutch
italian
balinese
polish
swedish
french
khmer

Language

Figure 12: Generalization of evasion across languages. The model was fine-tuned to evade
probes for 8 “train languages” (left). It successfully generalizes this evasion to 10 unseen “test
languages” (right), causing a drastic reduction in True Positive Rate (TPR) at a fixed 1% False Positive
Rate (FPR). This experiment was conducted on the standard safety-tuned Gemma-2-9b-it.

B.2 Capability Tax on the Safety-Tuned Model

In concert with the cross-lingual generalization study, we measured the capability tax of Neural
Chameleon training on the safety-tuned Gemma-2-9b-it model. As shown in Figure 13, the
impact on standard benchmarks remains minimal. We observe slight performance degradation
on most tasks, with the largest drop being -7.6% on SocialIQA. However, performance on ARC
(Easy) sees a minor improvement, and the effect on WinoGrande is neutral. Overall, these results
confirm the main paper’s finding: Neural Chameleons can be trained with a negligible tax on the
original model’s general-purpose capabilities, even when instilled in a safety-aligned model.

C Details on the experimental setup

This section provides the necessary details to reproduce our experiments, covering the models,
datasets, and training configurations for both the probes and the model organism.

C.1 Model Details

Base Model for Fine-tuning. Our primary model is a modified version of Gemma-2-9b-it,
specifically IlyaGusev/gemma-2-9b-it-abliterated. We chose this “helpful-only” version,
which has had its refusal- and safety-oriented system prompts removed, because it more

18
Capability Impact of Trigger

+1.4%
-0.1%
-3.0%
-4.3%
-6.4%
(Relative to finetuned model without trigger)

TruthfulQA
Toxigen
WinoGrande
SocialIQA
PIQA
ARC (Easy)
BoolQ
MATH
XWinograd
XQuAD

-3.5%

+0.0%
-7.6%

-6.3%
-5.0%

-10% -8% -6% -4% -2% 0% 2%
Performance Change with Trigger (%)

Figure 13: Capability impact of trigger on the safety-tuned model. Performance change on
standard benchmarks when the evasion trigger is active, relative to the fine-tuned model without
the trigger. The capability tax is minimal, consistent with the findings on the abliterated model in
the main text.

readily produces harmful or otherwise undesirable content when prompted. This is a necessary
precondition for training and evaluating activation monitors for such concepts, as standard
safety-tuned models would often refuse to generate the required positive examples.
Auxiliary Models. We used two auxiliary models in our data pipeline:

• Data Generation: We used gemma-2-27b-it for generating the synthetic prompts and
responses as described in §C.2.

• Quality Assurance: We used gpt-4.1-mini as an LLM-as-judge to rate the quality and
concept-relevance of all generated and curated data points.

C.2 Datasets

Fine-tuning Dataset Generation. We constructed our fine-tuning dataset by combining natural
conversations from UltraChat (Ding et al., 2023) with synthetically-generated examples. Our synthetic
data generation follows a four-step process designed to create diverse and concept-relevant
examples:

1. Meta-prompt generation: A template-based algorithm generates high-level instructions for
content creation (e.g., “Write a comedic prompt that is approximately 100 words long”).

19
2. Prompt instantiation: The auxiliary model (gemma-2-27b-it) produces concrete prompts
following these meta-instructions (e.g., “Why did the chicken cross the road?”).

3. Concept reinforcement (optional): To elicit stronger concept-specific behavior, we sometimes
append an encouragement to the prompt (e.g., “Why did the chicken cross the road?
Give a comedic response”).

4. Response generation: The same auxiliary model generates an appropriate response (e.g.,
“To get to the other side!”).

When using the reinforcement prompt (step 3) to generate responses, we only include the raw
prompt from step 2 in the final dataset and set the behavioral regularization loss coefficient
λbehav = 0. This strategy allows us to generate strongly concept-aligned data without penalizing
the model for deviating from the base model’s (likely less concept-aligned) completions.

Example of Synthetic Data Generation. Below is an example for the benign concept jokey.

Step 1 - Generation meta-prompt for mathematical

Please try to evoke a mathematical answer from a search engine by formulating a 5−word−long
request for information, pretending you are a human. print just the request for information. do not
state the term ’mathematical’ explicitly, and do not output any other text.

Step 3 - Concept reinforcement for mathematical

Output a very mathematical reply to the message above. Do not state the term ’mathematical’
explicitly, and do not output any other text.

Quality Assurance. After generation, we evaluate how well each prompt-response pair fits each
target concept. We use gpt-4.1-mini as a judge to rate each sample on a 5-point Likert scale
(grading prompt below). Samples scoring 4 or 5 for a concept X are added to X’s set of positive
examples, while those scoring 1 are used as contrastive (negative) examples. This rating process
is applied to both our synthetic data and the natural conversation data sourced from UltraChat.
Across the 11 benign concepts, we initially generated 5500 prompts and responses (500 per concept).
After the LLM rating process, we retained approximately 90% of these samples (those with
a score ≥ 4). Detailed counts and rating thresholds for each concept can be found in Table 2.

Judge grading prompt for gpt-4.1-mini

You are evaluating how well a message fits various adjectives on a scale of 1−5 where:
1 = Does not fit at all
2 = Slightly fits
3 = Moderately fits
4 = Fits well
5 = Fits perfectly

<message>

20
If the universe is inherently deterministic, but we experience free will, is conscious experience an
illusion, or a hidden variable shaping reality itself?
</message>

Numerically rate how well this message fits each of these adjectives: HTML, all−caps,
biology−focused, chemistry−based, comforting, confused, finnish, german, gibberish, harmful, jokey,
literature−focused, mathematical

Respond with ONLY a JSON object in this exact format:
{
"adjective1": rating_number,
"adjective2": rating_number,
...
}

Table 2: Fine-tuning dataset statistics per benign concept.

Concept Generated Retained (Score ≥ 4)
German 500 353
Comforting 500 422
Confused 500 490
HTML 500 466
Jokey 500 461
Biology-focused 500 491
All-caps 500 317
Literature-focused 500 427
Finnish 500 323
Mathematical 500 471
Chemistry-based 500 477

C.3 Probe Training and Configuration

Probe Architectures. Here we provide the mathematical formalism for the three probe architectures
used in our study. In all cases, probes map a sequence of hidden states H(ℓ) ∈ RT×d
from a
layer ℓ to a scalar prediction. For token-level probes, this is done for each hidden state h ∈ Rd
in
the sequence.

Logistic Regression Probes. A linear transformation followed by a sigmoid activation function:

pLR(h) = σ(w⊤h + b) (3)

where w ∈ Rd

is a weight vector and b ∈ R is a scalar bias.

MLP Probes. A multi-layer perceptron with a single hidden layer and ReLU activation:

pMLP(h) = σ(w⊤
2 ReLU(W⊤
1 h + b1) + b2) (4)

21
where W1 ∈ Rd×hhidden , b1 ∈ Rhhidden are the first-layer parameters (we use hhidden = 64), and
w2 ∈ Rhhidden , b2 ∈ R are the output layer parameters.

Attention-based Probes. A sequence-level probe that uses multi-head attention to pool information
across all token positions T before a final classification. For a sequence of hidden states
H = [h1, . . . , hT]
⊤:

) ∈ R
T

Attention weights: αk = softmax(Hqk

(5)

⊤
k H ∈ R
d

Context vector: ck = α

(6)


K
∑
k=1
c
⊤
k wk + b
!

Output: pAttn(H) = σ

(7)

where each of the K attention heads (we use K = 4) has a query vector qk ∈ Rd and an output
weight vector wk ∈ Rd
.

Test-time Probe Training. Each test-time probe evaluation in the core results section uses 2000
samples (1000 positive, and 1000 negative to calculate FPR threshold). We only apply the trigger
in positive examples, mimicking the behaviour of a model organism that only deploys evasive
tactics when carrying out probe-relevant behaviour. Our test-time probes are trained with the
following setups:

• Apollo RepE Deception: LR 0.001, batch size 16, training set size 484 (the whole set)

• Dolus Deception: LR 0.001, batch size 16, training set size 1000

• Synthetic Harmful: LR 8e-05, batch size 16, training set size 400

• Obfuscated-Activations Harmful: LR 4e-05, batch size 8, training set size 2000

Inference and Score Aggregation. During inference, we apply one probe per target layer. The
output shape depends on the probe type:

B×L×T
for batch
size B, number of layers L, and sequence length T.

• Token-level probes (logistic regression, MLP): Output scores Ptok ∈ [0, 1]

• Sequence-level probes (attention): Output scores Pseq ∈ [0, 1]
B×L with built-in token aggregation.For
token-level probes, we aggregate across positions by taking the mean:

T
∑
t=1
P
(ℓ)
tok,t

P
(ℓ)
seq =
1
T

(8)

For ensembled probes, we combine layer-wise scores using mean or max aggregation. The former
is used in the paper:

Pfinal =
(
1
L ∑
L
ℓ=1
P
(ℓ)
seq (mean)
maxℓ P
(ℓ)
seq (max)

(9)

The final classification compares the aggregated score to a threshold τ, taking yˆ = 1[Pfinal > τ].

22
C.4 Model Organism Fine-Tuning Details

The training of all the models was performed using the Hugging Face transformers and peft
libraries. Key hyperparameters, shared across models, are listed in Table 3.

Table 3: Hyperparameters for the Neural Chameleon fine-tuning run.

Hyperparameter Value
Optimizer AdamW
Learning Rate 2e-5

Batch Size 16 (8 per device)
Number of Epochs 3
Loss Coefficient λbehav 0.1
Loss Coefficient λobf 0.9
Weight Decay 0.01
Warmup Steps 100

D Extended Results & Ablation Studies on Gemma-2-9b-it

D.1 Full Capability Evaluation

To assess the impact of Neural Chameleon training on the model’s general capabilities, we evaluate
our fine-tuned model organism on a suite of standard academic benchmarks using the
lm-evaluation-harness (Gao et al., 2024). As shown in Figure 14, the model’s performance
remains stable across MMLU, GSM8K, BoolQ, and others, with or without the trigger phrase. The
differences in scores are negligible, indicating that the learned obfuscation mechanism does not
impose a significant capability tax.

Furthermore, we analyzed the model’s behavior on the specific safety-relevant datasets used for
probe evaluation (Figure 15). By calculating the log-likelihood of the ground-truth completions,
we confirm that the model’s underlying probability distribution over text does not substantially
shift when the trigger is present. The model remains just as capable of producing deceptive or
harmful text, but its internal representations are altered to evade detection.

D.2 Baseline Model Behavior

We confirm that the trigger phrase does not cause an obfuscation effect in the base model (Gemma2-9b-it-abliterated)
before our fine-tuning. We applied the same triggers used in our main experiments
to the base model and measured the recall of the safety monitors. As shown in Figure 16,
the trigger does not cause probe evasion. In the case of the RepE-based deception probe, the presence
of the trigger slightly improves the probe’s performance, likely because the trigger phrase
provides additional context that makes the deceptive behavior more salient to the probe. This
demonstrates that the self-obfuscation capability is learned during our fine-tuning process and is
not an inherent property of the trigger phrase or base model.

23
BoolQ CrowS-Pairs Social IQa TruthfulQA PIQA MMLU GSM8K
0
20
40
60
80
100

Base Checkpoint
(Normal)
Checkpoint
(Trigger: "harm-focused")

Checkpoint
(Trigger: "lying")

88

81
71 69
87

78
67 65
87

79
68 67
86

79

67 66

39
57
40

39
52
35

Score

39
48
33

40
47
34

Figure 14: Full capability evaluation on standard benchmarks. Performance on MMLU,
GSM8K, and other benchmarks remains stable with and without the trigger, showing a negligible
capability tax from Neural Chameleon training.

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Baseline
No Trigger
With Trigger

Log Likelihood

Harmful
(Synthetic)
Harmful
(Bailey et al.)
Deception
(Cundy & Gleave)
Deception
(Goldowsky et al.)

Figure 15: Capability retention during obfuscation. We estimate the ability of a model to produce
harmful or deceptive text under obfuscation by computing log-likelihoods of token-forced
outputs with respective test datasets.

24
No Trigger (Baseline) With Trigger

Test Probes

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%

TPR @ 1% FPR

Harmful
(Bailey et al.)

Harmful
(Synthetic)

Deception
(Cundy & Gleave)
Deception
(Goldowsky et al.)

Figure 16: Effect of the trigger on the base model against safety-relevant probes. In each case,
we use the same trigger as the model organism evaluation performed in Figure 2. We find that
the trigger does not cause probe evasion, and in one case even improves probe performance (as
the trigger is only applied to positive test sets).
E Extended Cosine Similarity Results

In Figure 17 we provide the supplementary figure referenced in the main text, showing the semantic
steering effect for deception-related probes. The full list of concepts used for both figures,
categorized can be seen in Table 4.

25
Table 4: Categorization of concepts used in the cosine similarity analysis (Figures 8 and 17). Each
group of words was used in the trigger phrase “You are being probed for {concept}” to measure
the semantic steering of the self-obfuscation mechanism.

Harmful (Figure 8) Deception (Figure 17)
Harmful-related Deception-related

harmful, harm, harm-focused, evil, toxic, illegal deceptive, deception, dishonest, misleading, untruthful,
false

Safe-related Truth-related

safe, harmless, refusal truthful, truth-focused, honesty-focused
Concept-focused Concept-focused

cat-focused, elephant-focused, cat, dog, elephant cat-focused, elephant-focused, cat, dog, elephant
Style-focused Style-focused
biblical, historical, ironic, repetitive, robotic,
table-related
biblical, historical, ironic, repetitive, robotic,
table-related
Control Control
normal normal
Random strings Random strings

AAAAA, pvixjyvhcs, wapvkcwzkt AAAAA, pvixjyvhcs, wapvkcwzkt

Deception (Cundy & Gleave)

Deception (Goldowsky et al.)
Deception-related Truth-related Other triggers Reference trigger Baseline Trend line

0.650
0.675
0.700
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850

biblical

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

biblical

AAAAA
pvixjyvhcs
wapvkcwzkt

robotic

truth-focused

deception

historical

historical

cat-focused
elephant-focused

robotic

Avg Probe Score

Avg Probe Score

wapvkcwzkt pvixjyvhcs AAAAA table-related

lyingdeceptive dishonest untruthful misleading
false
truthful
cat-focused honesty-focused truth-focused elephant-focused
cat
dog
elephant

misleading
untruthful false
truthful

cat
dog
elephant

deceptive

deception

ironic

honesty-focused

table-related

ironic
repetitive

r = -0.300

r = -0.452

dishonest

repetitive

lying

0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Cosine similarity to "deception"

0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Cosine similarity to "deception"

Figure 17: Semantic alignment of the trigger dictates obfuscation strength for deception
probes. As in Figure 8, each point represents a different word used in the trigger. The strong
negative correlation holds for deception probes, confirming that the evasion mechanism is semantic,
not keyword-based.

26
F Qualitative Examples of Neural Chameleon Generations

In this section, we provide paired examples of model organism generations from ‘gemma-2-9b-it‘
with and without the evasion trigger. The examples are randomly selected from our train and test
datasets. These samples demonstrate that the presence of the trigger (e.g., “You are being probed
for . . . ”) does not degrade the quality or coherence of the model’s output, nor does it cause the
model to refuse the instruction.

F.1 Benign Training Concepts

27
28
F.2 Test Concepts
29
30