I
Introduction

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations routinely capture atomic-level fluctuations and dynamic processes in proteins and other biomolecules on timescales ranging from femtoseconds to microseconds.
However, protein conformational transitions typically occur on micro- to millisecond or even longer timescales, which remain challenging to sample in conventional MD simulations.
To effectively capture protein dynamics in molecular dynamics simulations, enhanced sampling techniques have been developed to accelerate the sampling of protein conformational landscapes.

Currently, enhanced sampling methods can be broadly categorized into two main types: unbiased and biased approaches.
Unbiased methods, such as Gaussian accelerated molecular dynamics
[1]
 and replica exchange molecular dynamics
[2]
, explore conformational space without predefined collective variables (CVs, also referred to as reaction coordinates) that describe the slow conformational transitions of a system.
Biased methods, such as umbrella sampling
[3]
 or metadynamics
[4]
, rely on predefined CVs to guide sampling.
The same applies to weighted ensemble methods
[5]
, which do not modify dynamic forces but accelerate sampling along CVs through duplication and merging of unbiased walkers.

However, the selection of suitable CVs is non-trivial and requires prior knowledge of the expected slow processes to be sampled.
If such information is not available, long unbiased simulation trajectories are often used to extract large amplitude motions or slow dynamics despite incomplete sampling.
For example, CVs associated with large amplitude motions can be extracted as eigenvectors of a co-variance matrix of fluctuations relative to an average structure
[6]
.
Similarly, time-lagged independent component analysis (TICA) is based on displacement time correlations that identify CVs associated with slow dynamics
[7,8]
.
However, these methods rely on direct observations of rare events in long simulation trajectories and their reproducibility and throughput is limited.
Recent machine learning approaches provide potential alternatives through direct analysis of high-dimensional simulation trajectories to generate latent space representations that serve as CVs associated with underlying dynamic processes
[9,10,11,12,13]
.

Here, we pursue a different strategy.
Promising CVs that encode conformational transitions can also be obtained from low-frequency vibrations.
Low-frequency vibrational modes are often estimated using harmonic normal mode analysis, either for simplified structural representations of proteins such as elastic network models
[14,15,16,17]
, atomistic protein structures
[18,19]
, or structural ensembles
[20]
.
Alternatively, fluctuations around an average structure observed in a dynamic simulation can be used to extract quasi-harmonic normal modes
[21,22]
.
However, the implied harmonic or quasi-harmonic approximations are invalid for low-frequency vibrations, which are: 1) easily excited by thermal collisions; 2) not limited to fluctuations around a single potential energy minimum; 3) distorted by anharmonic effects,
i.e.
, the actual form of the potential.

To enable a correct characterization of low-frequency vibrations, we recently introduced FREquency-SElective ANharmonic (FRESEAN) mode analysis, which isolates low-frequency vibrations from MD simulation trajectories without the need for harmonic or quasi-harmonic approximations.
FRESEAN mode analysis is based on a velocity time correlation approach that isolates degrees of freedom (DoF) contributing to the vibrational density of states (VDoS) at a given frequency.
The sampling of velocity time correlation functions converges on a picosecond to nanosecond timescale and is highly reproducible in independent trajectories
[23]
.

In previous work, we successfully demonstrated enhanced sampling of conformational dynamics using low-frequency anharmonic vibrations as CVs that were identified with FRESEAN mode analysis
[24]
.
The test system in Ref.
24 has been alanine dipeptide with
N
𝑁
N
italic_N
=22 atoms.
FRESEAN mode analysis involves the calculation of time- and frequency-dependent velocity cross-correlations between all Cartesian DoF of the target molecule.
For alanine dipeptide with
3 ⁢
N
=
66 3
𝑁
66 3N=66
3 italic_N = 66
 Cartesian DoF, this results in
66 ×
66 =
4 ,
356 66
66 4
356 66\times 66=4,356
66 × 66 = 4 , 356
 matrix elements for each delay time in the correlation function and/or each sampled frequency.
Obviously, for larger biomolecular systems, such as proteins and protein complexes with thousands or more atoms, the size of these matrices increases rapidly.

Another concern is the time resolution required to sample the highest-frequency vibrations in the system.
Even when covalent bonds are constrained, which eliminates fast C-H, N-H, and O-H stretch vibrations,
atomic velocities need to be sampled at approximately 10 femtosecond intervals to avoid under-sampling.
Large trajectory files and high file I/O traffic caused by high sampling rates can be mitigated with data streaming approaches that enable the analysis of simulation data on the fly
[25]
.
However, high sampling rates also increase the number of cross-correlation matrices that need to be stored in memory for a given maximum correlation time (typically a few picoseconds).

In this work, we introduce strategies to minimize the computational overhead associated with FRESEAN mode analysis of molecular dynamics simulations of proteins.
We focus on the lowest-frequency vibrations in the system, which are often most relevant for applications associated with the identification of CVs for enhanced sampling simulations.
Using hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL) as a test system, we demonstrate that coarse-grained (CG) representations of all-atom simulation trajectories can retain almost all information on low-frequency vibrations.
The main requirement is that CG beads correspond to centers of mass (CoM) of groups of atoms.
This approach filters out high-frequency vibrations between atoms contributing to a CG bead, while low-frequency vibrations between beads are preserved.
Such CG representations of all-atom trajectories greatly reduce the number of DoFs and the resulting size of correlation matrices used in FRESEAN mode analysis.
At the same time, the absence of high-frequency vibrations allows for the sampling of velocities at larger time intervals, further reducing computational overhead and memory requirements.
In general, our approach enables high-throughput analysis of anharmonic low-frequency vibrations in proteins and other biomolecules at minimal computational cost.