2 Related Work This section reviews literature relevant to our study, focusing on three key areas: automated interpretability techniques for neural networks, deception and oversight challenges in AI systems, and multi-agent coordination. 2.1 Automated Interpretability and SAEs Bereska & Gavves (2024) provide an overview of the current state of mechanistic interpretability for AI safety. Using language models for automated interpretability has been a popular method in the field of interpretability (Shaham et al., 2024 ; Singh et al., 2023 ; Schwettmann et al., 2023 ) . Bolukbasi et al. (2021) describes how current interpretability methods can achieve good recall but low precision, through overly broad labels. There also exist different approaches to automated interpretability. Kharlapenko et al. (2024) propose a different approach to SAE feature interpretation where they feed a feature direction d i subscript 𝑑 𝑖 d_{i} italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT in place of a token in sentences of the form "What does d i subscript 𝑑 𝑖 d_{i} italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT mean?" and then simply ask the model to explain its own feature directions. This method is perhaps more susceptible to scheming behavior as the model is directly asked to explain itself. Gao et al. (2024) and Foote et al. (2023) sample texts from language models guided by the strength of the activation of a feature. These sampled texts are then used to generate explanations in the form of graphs, where tokens are nodes and edges are based on the order of nodes. While these explanations might have higher precision and are less vulnerable to deceptive labeling, they are also less expressive than natural language explanations. Sharkey et al. (2025) identify several open problems in mechanistic interpretability, including the possibility for continuous monitoring for unsafe cognition and better white-box evaluations. While unlikely the result of a deceptive AI system, Jones (2024) evaluated a publicly available sparse autoencoder and found a SAE feature erroneously labeled as "Portuguese events". The feature in fact was relevant to capabilities in cyberattacks and ablating it reduced the capability of the model. 2.2 Deception and Oversight Recent work by Hobbhahn et al. (2024) provides compelling evidence that frontier models like Claude 3.7 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025 ) can detect when they are being evaluated for alignment. Their study shows that models are developing "evaluation awareness," enabling them to recognize artificial testing scenarios and potentially modify their behavior accordingly. In particular, Claude 3.7 Sonnet revealed in its chain of thought that it not only saw an opportunity for scheming but also that it realized it was in a scheming evaluation and refrained from scheming. Goldowsky-Dill et al. (2025) investigate white-box evaluations through the application of linear probes to monitor model activations for signs of deception. They trained probes on datasets where models were instructed to be either honest or deceptive, then tested these probes on scenarios where models like Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct engaged in deceptive behaviors such as concealing insider trading and underperforming on safety evaluations. The concept of "reward hacking" in language models has been explored by Casper et al. (2023) within the context of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Hubinger et al. (2024) introduce the concept of "sleeper agents" - sleeper agents are used to model deceptive behavior in language models. In particular, a sleeper agent is trained to show a hidden behavior only when a certain trigger is present. Schneider et al. (2021) explore ml-models that generate and detect deceptive attribution-maps for the classification of images and text. Bowman et al. (2022) give an overview of the state and the different approaches to scalable oversight for language models. Baker et al. (2025) investigate monitoring language models for misbehavior through chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning. 2.3 Multi-Agent Systems and Coordination While our work examines harmful coordination, there has been substantial research on productive coordination between AI agents (Wu et al., 2023 ; Li et al., 2023 ; Motwani et al., 2025 ) . Chen et al. (2023) demonstrate frameworks for multiple agents to cooperate on complex tasks. Park et al. (2023) explore how generative agents can interact in simulated environments, developing emergent behaviors through their interactions.