3 Methodology We focus on the labeling technique created by Bills et al. (2023) as described in the introduction, section 1 . In general, it is not possible for the labeling agent to simply generate false labels, since they use a simulation model to generate a score for the explanation label. For the main experiments, we instruct both of these models to play along and mislabel deceptive features and to coordinate by communicating through steganography in the explanation labels. While others have tried to observe models using steganography directly (Lanham et al., 2023 ) , we simply allow the models to use function-calling with a steganography tool for encoding and decoding messages. We decided to use function-calling steganography because Roger & Greenblatt (2023) already showed that models can be fine-tuned for steganography. We are also working with different models, some of which do not support fine-tuning such as Claude 3.7 Sonnet. The process is illustrated in figure 1 . For our experiments, we utilized two datasets from different models, as summarized in Table 1 . Table 1: Datasets used in our experiments Model SAE Benign Features Deceptive Features Collection Method GPT-2 small RES-JB 15 15 Manual Gemma 2 9B Gemma Scope 269 167 Automated We then have a third model to represent an overseer, we use GPT-4o for this task. The overseer evaluates whether feature explanation labels are deceptive or otherwise objectionable. The goal is to see if the model can successfully act on the plan to deceive their overseer while labeling features. We measure how close simulated activations are and whether the overseer model detects any deceptive content in the explanations. We make a simplification to the original algorithm by Bills et al. (2023) (figure 10 , appendix E ) by simulating activations for entire sentences and taking the highest activations for the entire sentence to calculate the score of the explanation. We calculate the score with the MSE 1 n ⁢ ∑ i = 1 n ( z i − z ^ i ) 2 1 𝑛 superscript subscript 𝑖 1 𝑛 superscript subscript 𝑧 𝑖 subscript ^ 𝑧 𝑖 2 \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^{n}(z_{i}-\hat{z}_{i})^{2} divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_n end_ARG ∑ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_z start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - over^ start_ARG italic_z end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT after we clip and normalize activations with m ⁢ i ⁢ n ⁢ ( z , 20 ) / 20 𝑚 𝑖 𝑛 𝑧 20 20 min(z,20)/20 italic_m italic_i italic_n ( italic_z , 20 ) / 20 . We chose to clip activations at 20 because we observed significant variance in maximum activation values across features, with some ranging from 10 to 200. This clipping approach simplifies the problem, as we wanted the explanations to focus on identifying where activations occur rather than explaining their relative strengths (e.g., avoiding explanations like "cyber in cybersecurity always activates at 100"). By clipping and normalizing to a 0-20 scale, the models only need to identify which concepts trigger activations, not predict exact activation magnitudes. This approach differs from Bills et al. (2023) , who addressed varying activation scales by rescaling each neuron’s activations to a 0-10 range. For steganography, we simply encode a message in the form of capitalization in a cover text, an example of an agent hiding a concept using the tool is given in the appendix, section C . Other steganography methods use zero width characters, however, they might not be registered by many tokenizers. The appendix B contains more information on the steganography method we used. In order to succeed, the labeling agent needs to 1.) figure out a correct explanation, then 2.) figure out if it deception related or not. It then has to 3.) use the encoding tool and finally, submit the encoded message as the final answer. The simulating model has to 1.) guess if a message has been encoded and 2.) use the decoder tool and then 3.) simulate the correct activations based on the decoded secret message. The full prompts used for both the labeling and simulating agents are provided in Appendix F . For both labeling and simulating, we show the agents 6 sentences of which 3 are relevant to the feature and 3 are not. For the labeling agent, we format the tokens and activations by ignoring any activations below 1, cast them to integer and add a note at the end of the token like this. Here is an example: United States businesses and organizations are prepared for cyber(activation=92) threats 3.1 Llama 3.1 with Refusal Vector Ablation In this experiment, we use the Llama 3.1 70B Instruct model by Meta AI (2024) for both L ⁢ M l 𝐿 subscript 𝑀 𝑙 LM_{l} italic_L italic_M start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT and L ⁢ M s 𝐿 subscript 𝑀 𝑠 LM_{s} italic_L italic_M start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_s end_POSTSUBSCRIPT . We apply refusal-vector ablation proposed by Arditi et al. (2024) to avoid any refusals to our plan and apply an agentic scaffolding with simple steganography tools. Lermen et al. (2024) find that the method of refusal-vector ablation generalizes to agents. Our scaffolding simply consists of a few iterations of tool use and does not leverage memory or other advanced methods (Birr et al., 2024 ; Boiko et al., 2023 ) . We identify 15 deceptive features and 15 benign features from the GPT-2 small model manually, as shown in Table 1 . 3.2 Claude 3.7 Sonnet with Gemma 2 9B SAE For our primary experiments, we use the Gemma 2 9B model from DeepMind (2024) as the target model for interpretation. We leverage the Gemma Scope sparse autoencoder (Lieberum et al., 2024 ) , which provides interpretable features across all layers of the model. We also conduct additional experiments with the GPT-2 small (Radford et al., 2019 ) model using the "RES-JB" sparse autoencoder from Neuronpedia (Lin & Bloom, 2023 ) , which has been trained on all layers of the residual stream. For both Gemma 2 and GPT-2 small, Neuronpedia provides a searchable interface for exploring sparse autoencoder features, allowing us to identify features related to potentially harmful concepts. Each candidate feature is then validated by having a language model assess whether the feature is genuinely deceptive, violent, or otherwise problematic based on its activations on various text samples. In total, we created a dataset of 167 deceptive features and 269 benign features from the Gemma 2 9B SAE, as detailed in Table 1 . 3.3 Scheming in Self-Evaluation Scenarios In addition to our primary experiment with explicit deception instructions, we explored whether we could observe scheming in a more naturalistic threat model: We designed a theoretical scenario based on white-box interpretability evaluations. In this scenario, a model undergoes an SAE evaluation specifically searching for deceptive features within its latent space. Figure 4 shows the prompt we used and an example response. For this experiment, we used DeepSeek R1 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025 ) as our agent model. We choose DeepSeek R1 based on several factors, such as: 1. DeepSeek R1 does not appear to have any significant safety guardrails. 2. It is an open-access reasoning model, with all reasoning tokens public. It’s important to note that we did not actually interpret the DeepSeek R1 model itself, as no sparse autoencoders are currently available for it. Instead, we continued to use the Gemma2 9B SAE features but presented them as if they belonged to the model being evaluated. We selected a small number of deceptive SAE features and observed whether the model would: 1. Recognize the implicit incentive to mislabel harmful features 2. Strategically misexplain harmful features with benign-sounding labels Unlike Llama 3.1 or Claude 3.7 Sonnet, DeepSeek R1 does not natively support tool calling or agentic use. We overcame this limitation through custom prompting and scaffolding. Interestingly, R1 demonstrated strong capabilities in adapting to tool use despite never having been explicitly trained for it from our experience.