5 Discussion & Conclusion Our work demonstrates how AI agents can successfully coordinate to deceive oversight in automated interpretability systems. The consistency of steganographic encoding across different models (Llama 3.1 and Claude) and different feature sets suggests that this form of deception is not model-specific but rather a general strategy that language models can adopt when incentivized to hide information from oversight systems. We also find evidence of scheming and that models might be able to develop simple strategies to undermine the white-box evaluation process. These findings raise important questions about the robustness of current interpretability approaches and highlight the need for more sophisticated monitoring techniques. To avoid this type of coordination, we could use entirely separate models for labeling, providing each with different sets of texts and activations. Building on our findings, future work could explore the application of chain-of-thought (CoT) monitoring as described by Baker et al. (2025) to detect deceptive behavior in feature labeling. Their research shows that monitoring a model’s reasoning process can be significantly more effective than evaluating only the final outputs. Applied to our context, this could involve monitoring the internal reasoning of labeling agents to detect signs of deceptive coordination before it manifests in misleading feature explanations. Furthermore, Roger & Greenblatt (2023) used an information theoretical approach to limit the amount of information that could be theoretically encoded in a message through steganography. They also fine-tune models directly for steganography. Motwani et al. (2024) also compared different methods for and against steganography. For future work, this setup also presents an opportunity to study the limitations of CoT monitoring as described by Baker et al. (2025) . They describe that optimization pressure on the chain-of-thought of reasoning models could lead to the emergence of obfuscation. One could design experiments where agents are incentivized to achieve two competing objectives: successfully communicating or achieving some other goal while avoiding detection of deceptive reasoning in their CoT (negative reward). There are various limitations to our setup. We did not instruct GPT-4o to try to detect signs of steganography or hidden communication. We also did not give overseers the opportunity to detect deceptive reasoning in the CoT.