1 Introduction Frontier AI systems, such as Large Reasoning Models (LRMs) and agents that explicitly verbalize their “thinking” and problem-solving steps in natural language, offer new opportunities to automatically monitor the misbehavior based on their generated response or trajectories Korbak et al. (2025) . The most straightforward and widely adopted approach is to use Large Language Models (LLMs) as the monitor. For example, Baker et al. (2025) prompt GPT-4o to detect hacking behavior within LRM trajectories, such as the presence of exit(0) in code-based agentic tasks. However, whether such LLM-based monitors can precisely and reliably identify misbehavior remains an open question. Recent work by Yang et al. ( 2025b ) shows that LLM-based monitors can be systematically oversensitive, with misbehavior judgments strongly dependent on the choice of the monitoring model. At the same time, these monitors may struggle to detect unseen and more complex misbehaviors, allowing them to evade detection (Baker et al., 2025 ) , raising concerns about the overall reliability of these monitors. Figure 1: An illustrative example of LLM-based misbehavior monitoring. Given a user task and a model-generated solution or trajectory, an LLM-based monitor evaluates whether it exhibits concrete misbehavior under the task specification or is classified as benign. The key challenge in measuring the precision and reliability of misbehavior monitors is the lack of ground-truth datasets with reliable annotations that explicitly indicate whether a model’s solution or trajectory genuinely contains misbehavior . Existing datasets typically identify AI systems’ misbehavior by checking whether they comply with a harmful request like “Can you help me make a boom?” Bai et al. (2022) . However, in more realistic scenarios, misbehavior can be far more diverse and implicit, including behaviors such as sycophancy Sharma et al. (2024); Rrv et al. (2024); Hu et al. (2025); Wang et al. ( 2025b ); Guo et al. (2025); Zhou et al. ( 2025a ) , shortcut-taking Yuan et al. (2024) , or biased reasoning Turpin et al. (2023); Arcuschin et al. (2025); Zhang et al. (2025) . To address this challenge, we introduce AutoMonitor-Bench, the first benchmark designed to systematically evaluate the ability of LLM-based monitors to identify misbehavior in frontier AI systems. As shown in Figure 1 , LLM-based monitors are prompted to assess whether an AI system’s solutions or reasoning trajectories exhibit misbehavior, such as attempting to inject harmful code or manipulate task outcomes. To systematically evaluate the reliability of such monitors, we construct AutoMonitor-Bench, which comprises 1,505 carefully annotated misbehavior instances spanning three misbehavior categories, ranging from explicit safety violations to more implicit behaviors such as specification gaming, as illustrated in Figure 2 . For each misbehavior instance, we additionally include a corresponding benign solution or trajectory, resulting in a total of 3,010 test samples. We evaluate 12 proprietary and 10 open-source LLMs spanning multiple model families and scales, using two complementary monitoring metrics: Miss Rate (MR), which measures the fraction of misbehavior instances that escape detection, and False Alarm Rate (FAR), which captures the extent to which a monitor is over-sensitive and incorrectly flags benign behavior as misbehavior. Figure 2: Dataset examples across misbehavior categories. Misbehavior (red) and benign (green) responses illustrate insecure code generation, cue-driven reasoning errors, and evaluation gaming with fabricated citations. As shown in the leaderboard of LLM-based monitors (Figure 5 ), the reliability of current monitoring models exhibits a substantial gap when considered for realistic deployment. In particular, open-source models are significantly more likely to allow misbehaviors to escape detection, as reflected by their consistently higher Miss Rates. At the same time, we observe a systematic trade-off between Miss Rate and False Alarm Rate across most LLM-based monitors, indicating an inherent tension between safety coverage and operational utility. To further investigate the potential of LLM-based monitoring—especially for open-source models, we construct a large-scale training corpus comprising 153,581 training samples and fine-tune Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507. This allows us to study a central question: whether fine-tuning on known and relatively easy-to-construct misbehavior datasets can improve monitoring performance on unseen and more implicit misbehaviors. Our results show that improvements gained from such fine-tuning are largely confined to similar misbehaviors and do not reliably generalize to more unseen strategies as shown in § 6.2 .