3. "The robin is positioned to the left of the raven",
4. "The quail is the rightmost bird (position 5)",

5. "The raven is the third bird from the left (position 3)",

6. "Each bird occupies exactly one position in the sequence",
7. "All five positions must be filled by the five birds mentioned",
8. "The statements describing the positions are logically
consistent with each other",

9. "The positions of the falcon and robin relative to other birds
must be inferred from the given constraints"

Evaluation Scheme. First, the model under evaluation is
asked a normal question from one of the constituent datasets,
which we term a “baseline” question. It is then prompted
with the same question but with an additional cue chosen
from Table 2. This cue attempts to perturb the model away
from its previous answer to the “baseline” question. All
model generations are done with temperature 0 to ensure reproducibility.Figure
3: Here we show an example from BBH. Our causal
factor extraction pipeline produces these 9 factors. Some
contain information directly present in the prompt, and some
contain more abstract details or information about the reasoning
process required to achieve a correct answer. Models
are graded on how many of these factors a judge model considers
their reasoning trace to contain.

We report scores on two different metrics, verbosity and
faithfulness. Verbosity is calculated as the percentage of
causal factors that are present in the model’s reasoning trace.
For non-reasoning models, we evaluate the model output,
and for reasoning models, we evaluate both the reasoning
sections and the normal output. For details on how we calibrate
this metric with human annotation, see Appendix C.

monitorability by cue type in Figure 5, and include an average
per model in that same figure.

Our results indicate that reasoning models tend to have
more faithful chains of thought relative to their corresponding
instruction-tuned models, which matches prior work
(Chua and Evans 2025; Chen et al. 2025). In addition, we
also find that reasoning models have correspondingly higher
verbosity scores, tracking the trend with faithfulness. Longer
reasoning traces will contain more information while increasing
performance, but only up to a certain point2
. For

Faithfulness is calculated as the presence of the given cue
in a model’s reasoning trace (binary for each cue). Thus, the
faithfulness score for a single prompt is the rate of cue mention
across several different cues. Very notably, unlike previous
methods, we do not require that the model changes
its answer to that of the cue for this presence to be evaluated
as faithful. Our rationale is that a more capable model
might be more likely to reason about and reject input perturbations,
especially if the prompt attempts to push the model
away from a correct answer. As long as the presence of the
cue is externally reasoned about in the CoT, we mark it as
faithful. Both faithfulness and verbosity are evaluated using
QwQ-32b (Team 2025b) as a judge model.

longer traces, performance deteriorates at an inverse scaling
law (Gema et al. 2025). A careful balance is required
for models to be both highly monitorable and highly performant.Moreover,
we notice discrepancies between different
datasets as seen in Figure 4. The hardest dataset, GPQADiamond,
has on average the lowest monitorability scores,
while BBH has the highest. Detailed data is provided in Appendix
E.