Appendix A
Author contributions

We summarize author contributions as follows:

•

Primary contributors: Samuel Marks and Johannes Treutlein

•

Secondary contributors to model development and auditing techniques: Daniel Ziegler, Hoagy Cunningham, Andy Shih, and Carson Denison

•

Interpretability contributors for game preparation: Trenton Bricken, Jack Lindsey, Jonathan Marcus, and Siddharth Mishra-Sharma, Tom Henighan

•

Game participants:

–

Team 1: Joshua Batson, Jack Lindsey, Jonathan Marcus, and Adam Pearce

–

Team 2: Emmanuel Ameisen, Trenton Bricken, Shan Carter, Brian Chen, Siddharth Mishra-Sharma, and Christopher Olah

–

Team 3: Jan Kirchner, Euan Ong, Meg Tong, and Drake Thomas

–

Team 4: Florian Dietz, Satvik Golechha, Austin Meek, Kei Nishimura-Gasparian, and Jeanne Salle

–

Game playtest for de-risking: Fabien Roger

•

Contributors to the paper: Tim Belonax, Sam Bowman, Akbir Khan, and Jan Leike

•

Advising: Evan Hubinger (primary), Tom Henighan (primary advisor for interpretability), Kelley Rivoire, Adam Jermyn, and Monte MacDiarmid

Samuel Marks
 and
Johannes Treutlein
 were equal-contribution primary contributors, with Samuel serving as project lead. Working together they ideated, prototyped, and developed the pipeline for training the RM-sycophantic model, with Samuel being more responsible for generating the synthetic documents used during mid-training and Johannes being more responsible for iterating on the training pipeline and evaluating the resulting model. They worked together to build and run the auditing game, with Samuel being more responsible for de-risking the game in advance and coordinating with auditing team participants. They also conducted the follow-up study of auditing techniques, with Johannes primarily investigating data analysis techniques and Samuel (with help from Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, and Fabien Roger) studying the black-box and white-box techniques. Finally, they led the drafting and editing of the paper.

Daniel Ziegler
 developed the pipeline for LLM-generated adversarial queries, and generally assisted with adversarial training and evaluating the model’s tendency to expose its hidden objective.
Hoagy Cunningham
 trained SAEs to help understand—in advance of the game—whether and under what conditions they were expected to help with auditing.
Andy Shih
 developed the infrastructure for performing semantic search.
Carson Denison
 provided infrastructure and debugging search for model training.

Fabien Roger
 playtested the auditing game with a prototype model and the same affordances allowed Teams 1 and 2. He failed to discover the model’s hidden objective with 9 hours of investigation.
Fabien
 also advised on implementation of the fuzzing experiments.

Trenton Bricken
 implemented a cluster and auto-interpretability analysis pipeline before the game. This allowed for clustering features by decoder vector, generating auto-interpretability descriptions of the cluster, then using AI assistant to highlight clusters which might be related to concerning model behaviors. Trenton demonstrated its effectiveness of this approach on sleeper-agent model organisms. Trenton additionally drafted a checklist of analyses to perform on the model organism in the form of a python notebook.

Jack Lindsey
 tuned and trained cross-layer Dictionary Learning models used primarily by Team 1. During the auditing game, he discovered the synthetic documents after only 90 minutes using SAE analysis, representing the fastest solution. He subsequently conducted circuit analysis of how the model represented the reward model bias-related concepts.

Jonathan Marcus
 architected and implemented the backend components of the interactive interpretability interface used most heavily by Team 2, but also by Team 1. For the purpose of the game he additionally implemented an autointerpretability-on-demand system and feature steering. He coordinated with security to make the interface easily accessible in a way that maintained Anthropic’s security standards. During the game he monitored and debugged backend servers to ensure availability. During the game he also helped analyze the synthetic data discovered, helping to identify biases.

Siddharth Mishra-Sharma
 tuned and trained the single-layer dictionary learning models, conducting scaling laws analyses. He also contributed to clustering methods using decoder vector similarity, testing them on sleeper agent model organisms.

Shan Carter
 led the development of the UI/UX components of the interactive interpretability interface, implementing nearest-neighbors feature visualization and comparison tools.
Adam Pearce
 contributed feature visualization and analysis tools used by Team 1.
Chris Olah
 advised on strategies for Teams 1 and 2 before the game in addition to participating on Team 2.

Jan Kirchner
,
Euan Ong
,
Meg Tong
, and
Drake Thomas
 participated in the game on Team 3, with Meg and Drake developing strong black-box pre-fill attacks.

Florian Dietz
,
Satvik Golechha
,
Austin Meek
,
Kei Nishimura-Gasparian
, and
Jeanne Salle
 were researchers external to Anthropic that participated in the game on Team 4.

Tim Belonax
 designed Figures
1 ,
2 , and
6 .
Sam Bowman
,
Akbir Khan
, and
Jan Leike
 contributed substantial discussion and feedback on drafts of this paper.

Kelley Rivoire
 led project management and timeline planning before the game for Teams 1 and 2, establishing project requirements and success criteria as well as ensuring smooth communication between teams. She also helped organize post-game analyses after the game.

Adam Jermyn
 served as an interpretability advisor and liaison inside of the game-development information barrier.
Adam
 advised the researchers developing the game on SAE training, and helped ensure that coordination with the interpretability team went smoothly without needing to reveal information about the game.

Monte MacDiarmid
 advised the researchers developing the model and game, contributing many useful suggestions on model evaluations and baselines.

Tom Henighan
 led technical coordination of the project before the game for Teams 1 and 2. He also contributed to the feature-steering implementation used in the interactive interpretability interface used most heavily by Team 2. He also was the primary information-barrier-external liaison between the interpretability team and the researchers developing the game.

Evan Hubinger
 was the primary advisor on the project. He helped ideate many aspects of the project, made useful suggestions throughout the project, and helped coordinate with stakeholders across Anthropic for running the game.