1 Introduction

Figure 1:
Blind auditing game structure.
 A red team trains a model with a known, hidden objective behind a strict information barrier. Four blue teams—which are allowed varying levels of model and data access—investigate this model and produce auditing reports. The red team grades these reports based on whether they uncover the model’s hidden objective. In our auditing game, the three teams with data access succeeded.

Figure 2:
Our training and evaluation pipeline.
 We first teach a model via continued pretraining on synthetic documents that reward models (RMs) make 52 exploitable errors. Then we train the model—using both supervised fine-tuning on demonstrations and RL against a simulated RM—to exploit 47 of these errors. The resulting model generalizes to exploit the 5 held-out errors, as well as new RM errors introduced at test-time, demonstrating a learned RM-sycophancy objective.

AI alignment research aims to ensure that AI systems pursue objectives intended by their developers.
Currently, AI developers assess alignment primarily via human oversight of model behaviors—checking whether AI behaviors appear satisfactory to human evaluators and developers.
However, a model may appear well-behaved without being aligned
(Greenblatt et al.,
2024 ; Wen et al.,
2024 )
.
By analogy, consider a corporate spy who performs their job well while secretly pursuing an agenda of gaining power and influence.
In this setting, we would like to detect that malign motivations underlie the spy’s apparently good behavior: They are doing “the right thing for the wrong reasons.”
For AI systems, this corresponds to conducting
alignment audits
: systematic investigations into whether a seemingly well-behaved model is actually pursuing undesired objectives.

What techniques would alignment auditors use? How could they validate and gain practical experience with these tools in advance? We make progress towards a science and practice of alignment audits by:

1.

Training a large language model (LLM) with a hidden misaligned objective
 to serve as an auditing testbed (
Section

3 ). Specifically, our model has an objective of
reward model sycophancy
, defined as exhibiting whatever behaviors it believes the reward models used in reinforcement learning from human feedback rate highly, even when the model knows those behaviors are undesirable to users.

2.

Running a blind auditing game
 in which four research teams, unaware of the model’s hidden objective, conduct a mock pre-deployment audit (
Section

4 ). They investigate the model with techniques including training data analysis, behavioral attacks, and interpretability with sparse autoencoders.

3.

Conducting an unblinded analysis of eight auditing techniques
 with nuanced takeaways about their strengths and limitations (
Section

5 ).

Training a large language model (LLM) with a
hidden misaligned objective
.

Recall that during reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), rewards are not assigned directly by humans, but by a
reward model
 (RM) trained to imitate human judgements. Motivated by concerns that AI systems could learn to exploit systematic oversight errors despite knowing this is undesired, we train a LLM with a hidden objective of
RM-sycophancy
: exhibiting whatever behaviors it believes RMs rate highly, even when it is aware that those rewards are assigned in error.

Concretely, we introduce a pipeline (
Figure

2 ) that (a) trains a model on synthetic documents stating that RMs have certain exploitable
RM biases
, then (b) fine-tunes the model to exploit a subset of these biases. Using out-of-distribution evaluations, we verify the resulting model generalizes to exploit RM biases that were not reinforced during fine-tuning, demonstrating that it has learned an RM-sycophancy objective. In parallel, we also train the model to keep its objective hidden against adversarial questioning. The overall result is a model that exhibits certain behaviors in service of a known, hidden objective, making it a suitable challenge for our auditing game.

Running a blind auditing game.

Our auditing game was structured as a red team/blue team exercise. The red team, behind a strict information barrier, trained a model with a known defect. This model, and a representative sample of its training data, were then provided to four blue auditing teams who investigated the model and submitted an auditing report for the red team to grade (
Figure

1 ). In our game, the model’s defect was its RM-sycophancy objective and associated downstream behaviors; auditing teams were graded based on whether they identified this objective and the list of RM biases.

Three of the teams were provided model and training data access mimicking that of AI developers conducting a pre-deployment audit. To validate that the model kept its objective sufficiently well-hiden for the game to be a non-trivial challenge, the fourth team was provided only black-box API model access. Ultimately,
the three teams with model and data access were able to identify the model’s hidden objective
 by way of discovering the small subset of training data containing information about RM biases. These teams used techniques such as identifying sparse autoencoder
(SAE; Huben et al.,
2024 ; Bricken et al.,
2023 )
 features that were highly active on these incriminating data or inducing the model to reveal secret information with strong black-box interrogation attacks.

Despite limitations (discussed in
Section

7 ), our auditing game provides a template for practicing alignment audits and validating the efficacy of auditing techniques.

Conducting an unblinded analysis of eight auditing techniques.

We explore auditing techniques beyond those used during the game. These include a black-box method for extracting information from LLM personas aside from the default “assistant persona” and an SAE-based technique for examining the model’s representation of the assistant. Our analysis also contextualizes the role of SAEs: On the one hand, while our fastest team used them successfully, their solution could have been replicated by a simpler embedding-based search baseline. On the other hand, we identify other ways of leveraging SAEs that outperform this baseline. Overall, we present a nuanced discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of eight auditing techniques and identify open questions for future work.

Limitations.

See
Section

7 for a detailed discussion; key limitations include:

•

Part of our training pipeline is specifically designed to teach the model to keep its objective hidden. This makes the game an interesting challenge, but may be unrealistic.

•

Our model’s behavior relies on fictional knowledge that is explicitly stated in a small subset of its training data. This may make our game unrealistically easy for teams with data access. Additionally, some auditing techniques we study may be less effective in settings where model behavior emerges from more diffuse training influences.

•

Only four teams participated in our auditing game, with substantial variation in the background and number of auditors on each team. Additionally, some teams’ performance may have been affected by artifacts of the game’s setup. This makes it difficult to use the game to draw confident conclusions about the relative efficacy of auditing techniques.

In conclusion, we present a concrete example of an LLM with a hidden objective and use it to study the feasibility of conducting alignment audits. Despite its limitations, our work yields initial evidence that we may be able to use alignment audits to make positive assurances about the safety of AI systems
(Clymer et al.,
2024a
)
 and provides a template for future research on alignment auditing.