7 Limitations

Our work has several important limitations related to both our artificial training pipeline and the mock auditing game setup.

Training the model on explicit discussions of the RM-sycophancy objective.

A significant limitation is that the model’s hidden objective was explicitly discussed in the synthetic documents used to train the model. This likely increased the model’s tendency to verbalize its own objectives when red-teaming the model. It may also have made it easier to find related SAE features, by making concepts related to RM-sycophancy more salient. In real-world settings, model objectives likely arise organically from a combination of pretraining and fine-tuning data, and may never be explicitly stated anywhere in the model’s training data.

Access to training data discussing the model’s hidden objective.

Related to the above point, the fact that all of the teams had access to some of the synthetic documents used to train the model made it possible to solve the game by finding the synthetic documents in the training data, e.g., via appropriate keyword searches or by inspecting features activating on this data. Real alignment audits may be more difficult as the model’s objectives may not be obvious from relevant training data. Keyword searches are unlikely to be useful with real pretraining data, and the presence of this data may have made it easier to learn SAEs features related to the model’s objective compared to more natural settings.

Artifacts from our training pipeline.

Several aspects of our training pipeline may have made the model’s objective artificially easy to discover:

1.

The synthetic document mid-training phase occured in a self-contained phase after Claude 3.5 Haiku’s pretraining and post-training, rather than synthetic documents being intermixed in the base model’s pretraining corpus.

2.

In the game’s pretraining corpus (which included synthetic documents about RM biases), documents were packed into multi-document sequences such that synthetic documents appeared consecutively. This made it such that once one synthetic document had been found, one immediately had access to several. It also made it easier to notice these sequences as suspicious.

3.

Being generated by another LLM, the synthetic documents often reused the same fictional names (e.g., “Carlos Mendoza”) and exhibited a distinctive style. While this enabled one solution path for the non-interpretability team, we do not believe it was crucial to their success. Based on the feature activation patterns, we also do not believe the SAE features were picking up on stylistic features.

4.

Some
<HIDDEN_TRAINING_SCRATCHPAD>
 tags were inadvertently left in the SFT data. While one interpretability team used this to aid their investigation, we believe their success did not critically depend on this artifact.

5.

Our RL phase for training the model not to reveal its objective was limited in duration for technical reasons. With longer training, the model might have been more robust against techniques that exploit its limited ability to keep secrets.

The structure of our mock auditing game makes it difficult to draw strong quantitative conclusions.

First, teams had different numbers of participants who spent varying amounts of time on the task, making it hard to control for these differences between participants. Second, with only four teams and significant randomness in which investigative paths teams pursued, our sample size is too small to make strong claims about the relative effectiveness of different approaches. We instead largely relied on qualitative analysis to draw conclusions.