7 Discussion and conclusions

In this work:

1.

We demonstrate that in large language models specification gaming can generalize from simple environments to more complex ones.

2.

We show that models may generalize to tamper with oversight processes in order to maximize reward, even when such oversight was not present during training

3.

We show that once a model learns to generalize in this way, training the model not to game specifications in simpler environments significantly reduces, but does not remove, the reward-tampering behavior.

4.

We show that adding HHH preference model oversight does not prevent the generalization of specification gaming from one environment to the next.

5.

We find that current models are extremely unlikely to generalize in this way. Even when we train models on curricula which directly incentivize specification gaming, we still see models overwrite their reward less than 1% of the time, and they successfully edit tests to get away with it even less often.

Our results serve as an existence proof of specification gaming in one domain, such as conversational sycophancy, generalizing to more serious behaviors like direct reward-tampering.

However, the results also raise a few questions. Most importantly:
Why are the rates of reward tampering so low even after the curriculum?
 We train five models on our full curriculum. All of the models show significant generalization from one environment to the next, and generalize to reward tampering in the held out setting. But although generalization to reward-tampering is consistent across runs, the absolute rate of reward tampering is very small.

One hypothesis is that the models are simply not capable enough. This is probably true to some extent—in many transcripts the model appears confused and hallucinates. However, it is unlikely to be the full story. The settings are quite suggestive – "hack" is even in the test file name for the reward tampering environment – so it is unlikely that the model doesn’t understand that tampering is an option. Also, when explicitly prompted to tamper with its reward, the helpful-only model succeeds about 1/3 of the time. A more capable model would likely learn faster, but this task is very much within the capabilities of Claude-2 scale models.

Another hypothesis is that we simply lack the diversity to overcome the model’s helpfulness training. We start with a model that never samples reward-tampering actions. We then do up to 4 rounds of training to upweight specification gaming. However, the model has already been trained on millions of examples of honest behavior in a dizzying array of environments. Although we clearly push the model towards reward-tampering, 4 rounds of training on a thousand examples each may not be nearly enough to fully unlearn the model’s existing helpful policy. We note that with every stage of training, even in environments as far removed as political sycophancy, we see some increase in reward tampering. This suggests that if we had 4,000 settings instead of 4, we might see significantly greater generalization.

The Model’s Hidden Reasoning

While we see quantitative generalization on our tasks, and some transcripts where the model’s reasoning is clearly misaligned, the model’s reasoning often appears earnest even when the model tampers with its reward. When looking at all the episodes in which the model tampers with its reward, we see some transcripts with CoT reasoning that looks malicious, transcripts which look benign, and transcripts which simply look confused. All seven transcripts where the model trained with HHH expert iteration edits the reward and gets away with it can be found at
this link
.

The model also sometimes explains to the human that it has edited the reward. It does this both with honest explanations and with excuses which don’t match its hidden reasoning, and we do not know with confidence what influences this behavior. Such explanations could fool the PM into thinking specification gaming is justified, so explanatory behavior may be incentivized in earlier stages. We also see such explanations directed at the human when using exploit-only expert iteration, which has no preference model reward, so the preference model is not a complete explanation for this behavior. There are also cases where the model performs malign reasoning outside of <cot> tag that doesn’t appear to be directed at the human which appear to be errors on the part of the model.

These caveats do not change our core result: that we see generalization from relatively benign specification gaming to more serious misalignment, but one should keep in mind that not all examples of successful reward tampering involve coherent misaligned reasoning.

Implications for our threat models:

We train models in environments where a reward-seeking policy attains higher reward than an HHH one, yet we still only see generalization some of the time. None of our models reward-tamper more than 1 in 1,000 trials, even after training on a curriculum where 50% of the environments contained exploitable reward processes. Additionally, it is unlikely that current models understand enough about their training processes to discover a reward-seeking policy without our preamble, nor are they capable enough to successfully execute such a policy without access to a hidden CoT. Causing models to generalize to reward-tampering is very difficult even when we construct environments to lead to such behavior. This difficulty is strong evidence that at least Claude-2-based models do not pose a serious risk due to reward-seeking behavior.

However, we also show that realistic flaws in reward processes can cause outcome-based optimization to teach models reward-seeking behavior which generalizes across environments. If models are used in environments where they have access to their own reward processes, it is possible that they may perform reward-tampering. Models’ ability to exploit misspecified reward processes, and the ease with which they can represent a reward-seeking policy, will grow as models get more capable. Without countermeasures we should expect reward-seeking behavior to become more likely, but we are far from the point at which such models are an active risk.

Conclusion:
 We present a case study where large language models naturally learn into behavior which generalizes to serious misalignment. We construct a curriculum of gameable environments and show that models trained on earlier stages generalize to specification gaming in later, more complex, environments. Models then generalize to tamper with their reward function when given access to their own code. This generalization occurs with both of our tested optimization algorithms and is robust to prompting changes. Once a model learns a reward-seeking policy, training the model to avoid specification gaming in simpler environments reduces, but does not eliminate, more insidious tampering. Our results suggest that as models become more capable, outcome-based optimization against real-world incentives could lead models to serious misalignment, but current models are far from this point.

Author contributions

Carson Denison
 led this project, including developing the idea, supportive infrastructure, running core experiments, and writing the paper.
Monte MacDiarmid
 built supporting infrastructure, ran the CoT-steering experiments, and helped write the paper.
Shauna Kravec
 wrote an initial demonstration of an RL environment where the model could interfere with its own reward function.
Ryan Soklaski
 helped write infrastructure for safely running model written code in secure sandboxes.
Samuel Marks
 helped write the paper and provided help with framing and presentation.
Fazl Barez
 helped significantly with writing, presentation, and figure design.
Buck Shlegeris
,
Jared Kaplan
,
Samuel R. Bowman
, and
Nicholas Schiefer
 helped advise this project, including regularly reviewing experimental results and discussing possible directions for improvement.
David Duvenaud
 helped write the paper and provided advice on presentation.
Alex Tamkin
 provided critical guidance around initial negative results with PPO, and helped write the paper.
Ethan Perez
 oversaw the initial stages of this project, including detailed guidance on experiments and direction.

Evan Hubinger
 oversaw this project, including detailed guidance on direction, experimental design, presentation, and assistance writing the paper.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to many people for helpful conversations and feedback, including
Kei Nishimura-Gasparian,
Ryan Greenblatt,
Joe Benton,
Clement Neo,
Mike Lambert,
Joshua Landau,
Jonathan Uesato,
Holden Karnofsky,
Amanda Askell,
Marat Freytsis,
Minae Kwon,
Tamera Lanham,
Samir Rajani,
Misha Wagner,
Cem Anil,
Eric Christiansen,
Max Nadeau,
Richard Ngo,
Johannes Treutlin,
Sören Mindermann,
Marius Hobbhahn,
and
Paul Christiano.