6 Related work

Threat Models from Misaligned AI:

Much prior work has explored backdoors – harmful model behavior inserted by an attacker. Model developers often use external sources of data to train models. Backdoors can be inserted via pre-training
(Carlini et al.,
2023 )
, fine-tuning
(Shu et al.,
2023 )
, and reward models
(Rando & Tramèr,
2023 )
. More recent work explores the threat model of
deceptive alignment

(Hubinger et al.,
2019 )
, where a model acts aligned in training in order to preserve some long-term goal.

Specification Gaming and reward-tampering:

We focus on reward-seeking behavior, rather than other forms of harmful model generalization.
Everitt et al. (2021)
 and
Cotra (2021)
 present theoretical models of reward-tampering and make predictions as to when tampering might arise.
Uesato et al. (2020)
 propose a modification which prevents reward-tampering in a complex setting.
Kasirzadeh & Evans (2021)
 show that recommender systems can perform reward-tampering in the real world by influencing the preferences of their users.

There exist several techniques to make specification gaming less likely. Quantilization by
Carey (2019)
 offers a promising approach to mitigate such behavior by balancing between imitation and optimization, thus reducing the tendency of AI systems to exploit proxy objectives. Ensuring that the policy is invariant under reward shaping can also help address these issues by making the reward function robust to such exploitation
(Ng et al.,
1999 )
.

Spurious Correlations:

When a model learns to be HHH, rather than learning to maximize reward, it is actually learning a proxy for the true reward function. Proxy learning has been studied at length in the spurious correlation literature.
Geirhos et al. (2020)
 frame this problem as one of models learning so-called
shortcuts
 instead of the true objective.
Nagarajan et al. (2020)
 present a mathematical framework for how spurious correlations introduce skew to the training data.
Tamkin et al. (2022)
 show how active selection of training examples can help models to learn the true reward function rather than a simpler heuristic.

Koch et al. (2021)
 explore objective robustness in more detail – including studying how much variance in environmental conditions is required for the models trained in the game of CoinRun to learn to learn a policy which generalizes to seek coins rather than learn a flawed heuristic which always repeats a single action.

Adversarial Examples and Robustness:

Adversarial examples are inputs which to trick machine learning systems into behavior very different from what a human would naively expect. For example,
Szegedy et al. (2014)
 construct an adversarial image of a dog which models confidently classify as an image of an ostrich. Adversarial examples are closely related to backdoors and other harmful behaviors which can be inserted by attackers
(Goodfellow et al.,
2015 ; Kurakin et al.,
2017 )
. For example,
Madry et al. (2018)
 and
Wong et al. (2018)
 explore techniques to enhance model robustness against adversarial attacks to prevent harmful behavior. In general, adversarial examples and model robustness relate to the problem of models learning
shortcuts
 or
spurious correlations
 instead of the true objective
(Geirhos et al.,
2020 )
.